[Unknown]: I.V.M.
[Amit Varma]: I.V.M.
[Amit Varma]: So, you have Jahangir's minions holding the snake, forcing his mouth open and shoving
[Amit Varma]: the rabbit inside.
[Amit Varma]: In the process, the mouth of the hapless snake is torn and it perishes.
[Amit Varma]: Not the first or last victim of the whims of an autocrat drunk on power.
[Amit Varma]: And this reminded me of modern times, because we see many of our leaders treat our economy
[Amit Varma]: just as Jahangir treated that snake.
[Amit Varma]: I wish Jahangir had just left that snake alone.
[Amit Varma]: The moral of the story, as you would have guessed by now, is this, the snake died.
[Unknown]: Welcome to the scene and the unseen, our weekly podcast on economics, politics and behavioral
[Unknown]: science.
[Unknown]: Please welcome your host, Amit Verma.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to the scene and the unseen.
[Amit Varma]: My guest today is Parvati Sharma and we'll be talking about her book, Jahangir, an intimate
[Amit Varma]: portrait of a great Mughal.
[Amit Varma]: This is not only a serious book of history that contained many insights and TIL moments
[Amit Varma]: for me, but it was also a fantastically entertaining book to read with many moments that made me
[Amit Varma]: laugh out loud.
[Amit Varma]: Also, as much as it is a book of history, it is also a story about people with all their
[Amit Varma]: flaws and insecurities and idiosyncrasies.
[Amit Varma]: It's quite apt to call this, as the subtitle of the book suggests, an intimate portrait,
[Amit Varma]: because it did feel like I got some insight into Jahangir the man through this book.
[Amit Varma]: I also have another reason for doing this episode.
[Amit Varma]: Every episode of the scene and the unseen through its nearly 150 episode history has
[Amit Varma]: featured a Verma.
[Amit Varma]: I've never had a Sharma on the show.
[Amit Varma]: Like me, are you someone who loves fine art, but can't really afford to have paintings
[Amit Varma]: by the artists you like hanging on your walls?
[Amit Varma]: Well, worry no more.
[Amit Varma]: Head on over to Indiancolors.com.
[Amit Varma]: Indiancolors is a company that licenses images of the finest modern art from some of the
[Amit Varma]: best artists in India and adapts them into objects of everyday use.
[Amit Varma]: These include wearable art like stoles and shrugs, home decor like cushion covers and
[Amit Varma]: table runners, and accessories like tote bags.
[Amit Varma]: This allows art lovers to actually get fine art into their homes at an accessible price,
[Amit Varma]: and artists get royalties on sales, just like authors do.
[Amit Varma]: What's more, Indiancolors now has an exciting range of new products, including fridge magnets
[Amit Varma]: with some stunning motifs, and salad bowls and platters made of mango wood.
[Amit Varma]: Their artists include luminaries like Babu Xavier, Wazvoo x Wazvoo, Brinda Miller, Dilip
[Amit Varma]: Sharma, Shruti Nelson, and Pradeep Mishra.
[Amit Varma]: They accept bulk orders for corporate and festival gifting, but even if you want to
[Amit Varma]: buy just for yourself or a friend, head on over to Indiancolors.com.
[Amit Varma]: That's colors with an O-U.
[Amit Varma]: And if you want a 20% discount, apply the code IVM20.
[Amit Varma]: That's IVM for IVM podcast.
[Amit Varma]: IVM20 for a 20% discount at Indiancolors.com.
[Amit Varma]: Parvati, welcome to the scene and the unseen.
[Guest]: Thank you very much, Amit.
[Guest]: It's lovely to be here.
[Guest]: Glad to be the first Sharma on your show.
[Guest]: And that story that you told about the snake, I'm glad you picked that.
[Guest]: That was one of my many favorite stories when I was writing this book.
[Guest]: And people used to get a little worried when they saw me approach, but I just couldn't
[Guest]: stop telling them.
[Guest]: My Jahangir story is the latest mad thing I had read of this man doing.
[Guest]: And this was one of my top, top five.
[Amit Varma]: This is a fantastic story, but there are, like you said, so many fantastic stories.
[Amit Varma]: And we'll, you know, come back to some of them during our conversation.
[Amit Varma]: Before we get to ancient times and before we get to Jahangir, let's talk a little bit
[Amit Varma]: more about yourself.
[Amit Varma]: I've heard you mentioned that you didn't really like history in school.
[Guest]: I know I won't say I didn't like history in school.
[Guest]: I think for much of my schooling, I was sort of indifferent to it.
[Guest]: Really in the sense that it was, it didn't seem to go anywhere or mean anything.
[Guest]: And it was just these sort of abstractions and these dates and these names, you know,
[Guest]: and the Mauryas and the Guptas and the Cholas and the Pandyas and the Pallavas and the Rashtrakutas
[Amit Varma]: and the Mughals.
[Guest]: And a sunny dual would say, Tariq pe Tariq.
[Guest]: Tariq pe Tariq, yes.
[Guest]: None of it added up to anything.
[Guest]: But I think I did begin to enjoy it towards the end, like in my 11th and 12th standard.
[Guest]: And but even then I didn't, in college I was always drawn towards literature and that's
[Guest]: what I wanted to study.
[Guest]: But I think after three years of English, I wanted to do sort of what I thought at the
[Guest]: time rather naively, real stories.
[Guest]: You know, I wanted to know the true things.
[Guest]: So then I went back to studying history.
[Guest]: And that's when I really began to, you know, began to enjoy it.
[Guest]: Because I think that sort of the disciplines of literature and history are not very far
[Guest]: apart.
[Guest]: Some of similar sort of faculties and have similar pleasures.
[Amit Varma]: And did you always want to be a writer?
[Guest]: I always wanted to be a writer, yes.
[Guest]: I don't even know from when.
[Guest]: I mean, I always wanted to be a writer.
[Guest]: I always wanted to be published.
[Guest]: And as the older I got, and the less published I was, the sadder I became.
[Guest]: And I remember, you know, I think turning 30, which was also a stressful moment.
[Guest]: And generally bevelling my fate and saying, oh, I will never, never be published.
[Guest]: And a friend said to me, she said that, you know, if you don't write, what will anyone
[Guest]: publish?
[Guest]: And then, you know, we were talking earlier about discipline in writing.
[Guest]: And that's when I started doing this, at her suggestion only, writing every day.
[Guest]: You just sit and write for one hour every day, or at least sit in front of your computer
[Guest]: for one hour every day regardless of what comes out.
[Guest]: And I started doing that like exercise.
[Guest]: And it, you know, it worked because it's like a muscle, you know, you strengthen it the
[Guest]: more you do it.
[Guest]: So yeah, so that I think is when I started writing with some kind of plan.
[Guest]: But, but much before that, I mean, from as long back as I can remember, sort of scribbling
[Guest]: away in diaries and things and trying to imitate whatever, whoever I liked at the moment, at
[Guest]: that time, whichever writer I was reading, I wanted to, you know, be that writer.
[Amit Varma]: So yeah.
[Amit Varma]: It sounds very similar to me, I remember when as a kid, I used to read Shakespeare, I had
[Amit Varma]: this brief phase when I tried to write like Shakespeare in that language, which is extremely
[Amit Varma]: silly and don't try this at home.
[Amit Varma]: And I also was unpublished before 30.
[Amit Varma]: And it's interesting, you know, our mutual friend Manu Pillay was on the show.
[Guest]: Yes, he's not 30.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, he's just about to turn 30 or turn 30.
[Amit Varma]: And he mentioned to me while, you know, while we were having coffee before one of his shows,
[Amit Varma]: and it made me very angry, I wanted to punch him.
[Amit Varma]: He said that, you know, this book has fulfilled an ambition of mine.
[Amit Varma]: And I said, What is that?
[Amit Varma]: And he said, I wanted to write three books before I was 30.
[Amit Varma]: And I was like, this kid has barely started shaving and reaching such heights.
[Amit Varma]: But now you also have written many books.
[Amit Varma]: And so to start with, did you you saw yourself as a writer of fiction, right?
[Amit Varma]: Always, yeah.
[Guest]: Yeah, that was what I always wanted to write.
[Guest]: And it's also what I always enjoyed reading, you know, I loved books and fiction.
[Guest]: So I wanted to write them.
[Amit Varma]: Who was who was sort of the writers that you really liked, or the writers that you thought
[Amit Varma]: that you might one day write like?
[Amit Varma]: I mean, in the sense, that's sort of my space, that kind of thing.
[Guest]: You know, so like, so every everyone at that moment, whoever it was, so so so like your
[Guest]: Shakespeare, I also I took on Dostoevsky at the age of I think, 16 or 17, I read Crime
[Guest]: and Punishment and I didn't like the ending at all.
[Guest]: I was like, what is this?
[Guest]: I can do better.
[Unknown]: Did you?
[Guest]: I rewrote the ending.
[Amit Varma]: You rewrote the ending of Crime and Punishment.
[Guest]: So I think the punishment for that was that I was not able to write anything worthwhile
[Guest]: until I was 30.
[Guest]: This kind of arrogance should not just go ignored by the universe.
[Guest]: But, you know, there's some like deep influences, you know, from childhood.
[Guest]: I think I think Roald Dahl was one.
[Guest]: Something about and even now I think something about just that, that sort of manic flow,
[Guest]: momentum and energy that he has in all his writing, both for adults and children, is
[Guest]: something that I aspire to.
[Guest]: P.G.
[Guest]: Woodhouse, of course, I remember I think also sometime in college reading The God of Small
[Guest]: Things and really being completely blown away by it.
[Guest]: I think I started it something after dinner and I read the whole night.
[Guest]: And I think part of the reason it was the way it was written, all that was fantastic.
[Guest]: But also somehow at that time, in that place, it was somehow reflecting a world that I knew,
[Guest]: which was unusual, you know, still at that time in fiction that I was reading, even in
[Guest]: fiction written by Indians, it was unusual.
[Guest]: So yeah, I mean.
[Amit Varma]: And that's very interesting because I can understand why you are a fan of Roald Dahl
[Amit Varma]: and because, you know, like him again, you've written for both adults and children.
[Amit Varma]: The Arundhati Roy took me a little by surprise because your voice is very different in a
[Amit Varma]: good way in the sense that, I mean, I'm not a, my personal bias is that I'm not a fan
[Amit Varma]: of the very highly stylized kind of writers for whom language is very important.
[Amit Varma]: And I find people like Rushdie and Arundhati a little excessive in that sense that your
[Amit Varma]: attention is constantly drawn to the writing style.
[Amit Varma]: And I find that your style is, say, much more in a way of, say, Vikram said, very understated
[Amit Varma]: and very clear.
[Amit Varma]: And did you, you know, in your process of sort of writing, and especially when you were
[Amit Varma]: writing your children's books, did you find yourself giving a lot of thought to, say,
[Amit Varma]: the craft of writing?
[Amit Varma]: How do you write sentences?
[Amit Varma]: How do you put together narratives?
[Amit Varma]: What should you do?
[Guest]: What should you not do?
[Guest]: Yeah, I think, you know, with every book, it's been something that, you know, some,
[Guest]: something that I've had to learn in order to do it.
[Guest]: And I think, you know, my first book was a collection of short stories.
[Guest]: And I think there, a lot of the focus was on the craft of writing, I suggest, the sentence
[Guest]: level stuff, you know, and that, which I enjoyed.
[Guest]: And for me, it was the least taxing.
[Guest]: And for me, I find as a writer, the most difficult thing is plotting, and which is the sort of
[Guest]: barrier I encountered when I, you know, after that, I wanted to, you know, I wanted to write
[Guest]: a novel.
[Guest]: And you can't, I mean, doing sort of meandering, plotless short stories is one thing.
[Guest]: But plotless novel is a whole other thing.
[Guest]: And of course, you can do that.
[Guest]: But plotless novels are not even novels that I enjoy reading.
[Guest]: I mean, I like plots, I like a story.
[Guest]: I like, and I realized that it's to me, I think, four years and about six revisions
[Guest]: to get that very slim novella done.
[Guest]: Because I was, in the end, I realized what the problem was not just that the plot was
[Guest]: not falling into place.
[Guest]: But also, there was no momentum building and two things have to go together.
[Guest]: You know, you have to have a kind of momentum build up to take the plot from one thing to
[Guest]: the next.
[Guest]: So that was a difficult sort of experience.
[Guest]: And I think the similar thing I learned with that, after that, I did this book for children,
[Guest]: the story of Babur.
[Guest]: And there, I learned the same thing.
[Guest]: But even more, you know, because with kids, there was very little room for anything that
[Guest]: is not moving the action forward, you know, something has to be happening.
[Guest]: And I found that that was very energizing for me to have to do that, you know, as as
[Guest]: a writer, that was great fun of it that you know, that there was no there was no diversions,
[Guest]: there were no digressions, you're just going from one thing to the next.
[Guest]: And you know, maintain that, maintain interest and action.
[Amit Varma]: Do you feel that changed you as a writer in general, writing for children?
[Guest]: I think so.
[Guest]: I do.
[Guest]: I felt I felt a kind of livelier spirit.
[Guest]: I don't know if that's how that sounds.
[Guest]: But yeah, I felt a greater energy.
[Guest]: And I went from there, I was working on another novel.
[Guest]: And I wrote that novel with something of that, you know, children's book, momentum and energy
[Guest]: in mind.
[Guest]: And it did.
[Guest]: It helped really did.
[Amit Varma]: It was a...
[Amit Varma]: And so your first brush with writing history would therefore have been the book on Babur.
[Amit Varma]: And like, of course, you had a readymade plot there.
[Amit Varma]: But did the process of writing that book sort of change the way you look at the Mughals
[Amit Varma]: or the way you looked at the history of that period?
[Guest]: I don't know if it changed it because I hadn't even thought, you know, that much about history
[Guest]: in general or the Mughals in particular, except in the way that you know, everyone sort of
[Guest]: when you come across something or you know.
[Guest]: But I hadn't really taken any particular trouble to find out anything.
[Guest]: And but it did.
[Guest]: It took me completely by surprise.
[Guest]: What took me completely by surprise was the Babur Nama, which, you know, I started reading
[Guest]: not really knowing what to expect and not...
[Guest]: And then actually expecting more some kind of sort of dry recital of events or, you know,
[Guest]: or sort of dates and facts and figures and things like that.
[Guest]: And instead, it turned out to be this really, really sort of lucid, unselfconscious account
[Guest]: of this man's life.
[Guest]: And it and you know, right in the beginning, like within the first few pages, there's a
[Guest]: description, a barber is talking about his father.
[Amit Varma]: Over eating.
[Guest]: He was sort of a rotund man.
[Guest]: And once he had eaten and feasted, he would he was also sort of cheerful, he would laugh.
[Guest]: And he says the laces of his tunic would snap open.
[Guest]: And you know, immediately like the image you get is of this young child watching his father,
[Guest]: the king, you know, his laces of his tunic snapping open.
[Guest]: And there's a sort of little mischief and humour and affection.
[Amit Varma]: And such a literary detail also.
[Guest]: Yes, that's also.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: So, you know, that kind of detail that I wasn't expecting at all, but it really helped to
[Guest]: get a sense of Babur the man.
[Amit Varma]: And yet the Babur Nama is very different from, for example, the Jahangir Nama, in the sense
[Amit Varma]: that you mentioned how the Jahangir Nama is really Jahangir was keeping a diary.
[Unknown]: So it's not like a narrative written after a period of time.
[Amit Varma]: It's life unfolding as it is.
[Amit Varma]: And it has that immediacy and the seeming candour and the Babur Nama, Babur, you've
[Amit Varma]: mentioned that he was sort of writing it with an eye on history as well.
[Amit Varma]: It's also an act of, you know, creating a narrative about himself.
[Guest]: He is sort of writing it as his memoirs.
[Guest]: And Jahangir is writing it as his diary.
[Guest]: So there is in that sense, just the texture of it is different.
[Guest]: You know, Babur Nama is more like a record of significant things that happened in his
[Guest]: life.
[Guest]: But Jahangir is like exciting things happened yesterday.
[Amit Varma]: You know that.
[Unknown]: I saw a snake eating a rabbit.
[Amit Varma]: And let's kind of come to Jahangir.
[Amit Varma]: And it's very interesting that you chose Jahangir as a subject, because typically when you think
[Amit Varma]: of the Mughals, of course, there were sort of six great Mughals before the decline began,
[Amit Varma]: which is Babur Humayun, Akbar Jahangir, Shah Jahan and the infamous Aurangzeb.
[Amit Varma]: And Jahangir is sort of like a lost figure who for a long time has not been taken seriously
[Amit Varma]: by historians so much.
[Amit Varma]: He's, you know, he's been painted as ineffectual.
[Amit Varma]: He's not focused on conquering new territory like emperors are.
[Amit Varma]: He's sort of a weak man.
[Amit Varma]: He drinks a lot and so on.
[Amit Varma]: And one of the things that I learned while reading your book was that historians are
[Amit Varma]: now beginning to feel that he wasn't necessarily like this, that these are the imperatives
[Amit Varma]: that come from one how Shah Jahan wanted to portray him to sort of justify his own acts
[Amit Varma]: and to the work of Thomas Rowe, the East India Company emissary who was at the time there.
[Amit Varma]: And he also had his own incentives, if I may use a term I use often on the show, in painting
[Amit Varma]: Jahangir in a particular way.
[Amit Varma]: Tell me a little bit about this.
[Guest]: Yeah, no, so that was that was interesting for me also to discover this.
[Guest]: This particular argument is made by Corinne Lefebvre, who's a French historian who is
[Guest]: sort of re-evaluating both Jahangir's life and the Jahangir Nama.
[Guest]: And so when I was writing this book, in the first draft of it, the idea that I had of
[Guest]: this man was of like a sort of well-meaning, amiable, but dissolute, overall, not sort
[Guest]: of a lightweight, you know, entertaining, but not for the ages.
[Guest]: I mean, on the other hand, he ruled for 22 years, but even that, the generally accepted
[Guest]: sense that you gather if you read, you know, around him, is that Akbar had built up such
[Guest]: a strong empire that you would need, you know, another Akbar to even to undo it.
[Guest]: You know, even that would require more sort of energy than Jahangir was inclined to display
[Guest]: in his life.
[Guest]: But, you know, I was discussing this with a friend who's also a historian who was a
[Guest]: great help to me in the writing of this book, Anubhuti Maurya.
[Guest]: Well, you know, but she said, it's not really necessarily true that just on the momentum
[Guest]: of Akbar's centralization of power and creation of empire, that Jahangir would have been able
[Guest]: to rule for 22 years.
[Guest]: Because you know, dynasties can collapse at any time.
[Guest]: I mean, even today you can have governments falling or, you know, countries changing overnight
[Guest]: that can happen.
[Guest]: So certainly, you know, it's worth thinking that, you know, he must be doing something
[Guest]: right.
[Guest]: And then it was in fact Anubhuti who introduced me to the work of this Corian Lefebvre.
[Guest]: And she's written this fantastic, in which he makes this argument that, you know, this
[Guest]: idea that we have of Jahangir being the sort of weakling controlled by his wife and not
[Guest]: really up to much.
[Guest]: Well, it comes from one, the fact that there is four contemporary accounts of his reign
[Guest]: are limited only to him.
[Guest]: There's only the Jahangir Nama because, you know, if the emperor is writing his own diary,
[Guest]: then your history, who else will dare to?
[Guest]: And then there is this propaganda that travels down almost 400 years unchanged via Shah Jahan,
[Guest]: his historians who come after Jahangir.
[Guest]: And Shah Jahan has rebelled against his father in the last years of his reign and they never
[Guest]: quite make up.
[Guest]: So once Shah Jahan ascends the throne, he has to justify his rebellion.
[Guest]: And the only way he can, and he can't justify it by saying that, he can't say that, you
[Guest]: know, there was something that Jahangir was a bad king, because that would then justify
[Guest]: rebellions against him.
[Guest]: You cannot rebel against the emperor.
[Guest]: So he has to say that he was unable and unfit to be king because he was controlled by his
[Guest]: wife, Noor Jahan.
[Guest]: And Noor Jahan survives 20 years after Jahangir goes and Shah Jahan keeps a very close eye
[Guest]: on her the entire time, keeps him virtually imprisoned in Lahore.
[Guest]: She plays no public role whatsoever after that.
[Guest]: And this idea, I mean, so much so is that there's a painting from Shah Jahan's reign
[Guest]: which has Akbar sitting in the middle and there's Shah Jahan to his left and Jahangir
[Guest]: to his right.
[Guest]: And you know, Akbar is sort of blithely handing the crown over to Shah Jahan while Jahangir
[Amit Varma]: is sort of looking on, looking very sullen and a little sad.
[Amit Varma]: And this was part of the sort of, so these painters and Shah Jahan's times who were making
[Amit Varma]: all these paintings are kind of like the IT cell of today, right?
[Amit Varma]: His IT cell, which is pushing out these false narratives, I guess.
[Amit Varma]: And I guess another major work of that period, which everyone refers to is, of course, Abu
[Amit Varma]: Fazal's, you know, histories of Akbar, which are fairly hagiographic and he's just in awe
[Amit Varma]: of Akbar and he also doesn't like Jahangir very much.
[Amit Varma]: So Jahangir doesn't come across as very well.
[Amit Varma]: And then Jahangir, of course, gives him the ultimate bad book review by getting him beheaded
[Amit Varma]: and throwing his head into a latrine in one of the colorful details you've sort of described
[Amit Varma]: in your book.
[Amit Varma]: You've also spoken in the past about how the way you looked at Jahangir Nama, the book
[Amit Varma]: changed over time, that at first you just looked at it as an honest diary, that every
[Amit Varma]: day the guy is writing a diary.
[Amit Varma]: But then you realize there was probably a little more to it than that.
[Amit Varma]: Tell me a bit about that.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: So again, for this again, I mean, let it to Corinne Lefevre, who describes it as, as in
[Guest]: an essay, she calls it a model of imperial propaganda.
[Guest]: And I, you know, because when you the first time you read it, I recommend it to everyone
[Guest]: now having read it, it's really very readable.
[Guest]: It's entertaining.
[Guest]: It's fluent.
[Guest]: It's lucid.
[Guest]: It's well written.
[Guest]: It's got, it's got all kinds of emotions and, you know, action and adventure of all sorts.
[Guest]: So so and Jahangir is a good writer and you know, like good writers, he can make you believe
[Guest]: him as the narrator.
[Guest]: You know, he makes you sympathetic to him and he makes you be on his side.
[Guest]: But it doesn't mean that he was not aware that this was a public document.
[Guest]: And in fact, at some point, maybe about some midway through his reign, he has copies of
[Guest]: the of the Jahangir Nama that as it exists then made and distributed to kings around
[Guest]: the you know, in the in the region.
[Guest]: And he says, I sent it out and I meant it this Jahangir Nama to be a model of how to
[Guest]: rule.
[Guest]: So he's actually thinking of it in those terms.
[Amit Varma]: And but all the human frailties that kind of come across like his drinking, for example,
[Amit Varma]: and all of that, I mean, is that sort of slipping through the cracks of his, you know, posturing
[Amit Varma]: as such?
[Amit Varma]: Or does he feel that, you know, I mean, how convinced are you of this view of, you know,
[Amit Varma]: having read both translations of the book?
[Guest]: How convinced?
[Guest]: I, you know, I would say that, let's say the drinking, right?
[Guest]: He's talking, he's talking about the drinking, he's very seemingly, very strangely frank
[Guest]: about it.
[Guest]: You know, he says that I started drinking at 18.
[Guest]: He tells the story in great detail, says I started drinking at 18.
[Guest]: And I was out on a hunt.
[Guest]: And, you know, somebody got him just a little sort of pint or half a pint of sweet wine.
[Guest]: And he enjoyed it.
[Guest]: And before you know it, he's drinking 20 goblets of double distilled liquor a day, 14 during
[Amit Varma]: the day and the remainder at night.
[Amit Varma]: And then he goes on to elaborate that that's equivalent to six Hindustani seers, which
[Amit Varma]: is equivalent to one and a half Iranian morns.
[Guest]: And he's a scientific man of measurement.
[Guest]: Yeah, he likes, he likes to be clear.
[Guest]: And then he says that I was drinking so much that in my hangovers, my hands used to shake
[Guest]: so much that I couldn't even hold the goblet.
[Guest]: Somebody else would have to pour the liquor down my throat.
[Guest]: And he says, I called the doctor and the doctor said to me that if you don't stop, you'll
[Guest]: be dead in in six months.
[Guest]: And then he goes through his entire sort of de-addiction program.
[Amit Varma]: That was also done very meticulously.
[Guest]: He reduces it bit by bit, takes it down to six.
[Guest]: And mixes his spirit with wine, like dilutes the spirit with wine in order to...
[Amit Varma]: So that's how you give up drinking, gentlemen, dilute your spirits with wine.
[Guest]: And have a little opium during the day to get you through.
[Guest]: So on the one hand, you know, there's, it seems as if like, oh, OK, if you look at it
[Guest]: from a sort of a modern 21st century perspective, it would appear like, oh, this is like a,
[Guest]: you know, sort of a confessional narrative.
[Guest]: You know, how I almost died from drink, but then rose to be emperor.
[Guest]: And again, because I'm not a historian, I don't want to say like too, I don't want to
[Guest]: say things with too much authority.
[Guest]: But it's also like, you know, we're talking about the 17th century, drinking is not perhaps,
[Guest]: or at least addiction to drink is not viewed in the same way as it would be now.
[Guest]: You know, there are there are problems with drinking then.
[Guest]: I mean, there are there are sort of religious problems with it.
[Guest]: But the problem of addiction doesn't exist, perhaps, in the way that, you know, that it
[Amit Varma]: might...
[Amit Varma]: That we perceive it now, that there is a stigma on.
[Guest]: Yeah, so perhaps, you know, when he's writing, he's not writing against, you know, against
[Guest]: stigma.
[Guest]: Or, you know, when he writes about ordering the execution of the assassination of Abul
[Guest]: Fazal, which he again writes with very frank and forthright way.
[Guest]: He said this guy was forever making snide remarks about me to my father.
[Guest]: So I knew I had to get rid of him.
[Guest]: So I asked this Bir Singh Bundela if he would kindly waylay him.
[Guest]: And he did and he sent me his head.
[Guest]: And he says it as if, you know, it's a sort of cold blooded murder, really, that he's
[Guest]: ordered of, you know, a man that he must have known for most of his life.
[Guest]: And his father's like really one of his closest friends and advisors.
[Guest]: So but again, you know, and I was again discussing this with Anupooti, and who said that, you
[Guest]: know, again, this could be a, in a way, you know, is he saying here that, you know, this
[Guest]: is, let's say in the 17th century, if you are aiming to be king, or you are an emperor,
[Guest]: the image that you project of yourself is of a man who will not let anyone stand between
[Guest]: him and the throne, a certain ruthlessness is necessary, you know, it has to have to
[Amit Varma]: be that.
[Amit Varma]: And it's almost normalized.
[Amit Varma]: So it's not even something that it seems remarkable and, you know, and we'll come to other, I
[Amit Varma]: want to ask you questions about a couple of things you raised like drinking and addiction,
[Amit Varma]: number one, and number two, about the sort of casual cruelty that can sometimes happen.
[Amit Varma]: But you know, let's kind of go back to the narrative.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, you start your book essentially with Akbar.
[Amit Varma]: And a significant part of the story of Jahangir is really the story of Akbar wanting a son.
[Amit Varma]: And just to, you know, set some context, we often think of, you know, when we, we look
[Amit Varma]: at history in a sense with the hindsight bias, it's happened, we take it for granted.
[Amit Varma]: We take it for granted that the Mughal Empire was this great empire that lasted centuries.
[Amit Varma]: But as you've pointed out, and as Ramakoti spoke about in her episode with me a few weeks
[Amit Varma]: earlier, it wasn't such a done deal, you know, so Babur came over, you know, he was, well,
[Amit Varma]: when he ascended to his throne, he came over, he conquered a bit of it, but then they lost
[Amit Varma]: it and Humayun was in exile for 15 years.
[Amit Varma]: He was in fact in exile when he fell in love with Hamida Banu Begum in Afghanistan, I think,
[Amit Varma]: and he asked for her hand and she was like, who are you?
[Amit Varma]: You're, you know, you're running right now, you're not a king.
[Amit Varma]: And anyway, so that kind of worked out and Humayun comes back and he's just taken over
[Amit Varma]: the kingdom and then he dies.
[Amit Varma]: And Akbar ascends at 14.
[Amit Varma]: And the empire that he leaves, that Jahangir is born into, is just an awesome, incredible
[Amit Varma]: empire.
[Amit Varma]: And Jahangir is a first son.
[Amit Varma]: There is no dynasty without at least one son coming along.
[Amit Varma]: So you've written in your book about how badly Jahangir desires a son and when he is born,
[Amit Varma]: you write, quote, there is only so much self-control a joyful father can have.
[Amit Varma]: Celebrations burst upon Agra like lightning upon a rain-ripe sky.
[Amit Varma]: Heaps and heaps of gold were scattered, says one writer.
[Amit Varma]: Prisoners and dungeons across the empire were set free.
[Amit Varma]: For days, poets composed odes to the prince, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And then you quote Abu Fazl, Akbar's infamous biographer, quote, the auspicious birth of
[Amit Varma]: the world illuminating pearl of the mansion of dominion and fortune, the night gleaming
[Amit Varma]: jewel of the casket of greatness and glory, namely of Prince Sultan Salim, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: So Akbar wanted the son so badly and he loves his son so much.
[Amit Varma]: And yet there is such a sort of tension here because a son inevitably, no matter what he
[Amit Varma]: is, will be a disappointment to his father.
[Guest]: I mean, not any son and any father, but you know, this was Akbar.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: So Akbar really, I mean, who could have not disappointed him?
[Guest]: It's not, you know, I wouldn't want to be, I wouldn't have wanted to be in Salim's place.
[Guest]: It was because this guy, like Akbar really is extraordinary.
[Guest]: You know, he is, I mean, there is a reason why he shines brighter than other people in
[Guest]: history.
[Guest]: And there are some people like that who really accomplished far more in one lifetime than
[Guest]: most people could in 10.
[Guest]: And there's no, I mean, when he becomes whatever, I mean, emperor, but emperor of what?
[Guest]: You know, basically of Delhi, he's not even in Delhi, he's still in Punjab.
[Guest]: He's there still he and Beram Khan is still in pursuit of Sikandar Sur and Mayun slips
[Guest]: and falls and breaks his head and Akbar is suddenly king, but there's no reason for him
[Guest]: to remain.
[Guest]: There's loads of competition, and not least from him, who is one of the, you know, great
[Guest]: generals of that time and has fought several battles and never lost one and is far more
[Guest]: experienced and has a big, huge army and lots of elephants and he's primed to take over,
[Guest]: you know, and they face each other in Panipat.
[Guest]: And there, I mean, the battle from, you know, whatever I've read of it, it sort of, it was
[Guest]: a fairly equal battle.
[Guest]: And then he does have a stroke of luck because Hemu is struck in the eye with an arrow and
[Guest]: he and he falls.
[Guest]: And the logic of battles at the time was if the leader collapses, or the commander collapses,
[Guest]: the army collapses, you know, which is really very inefficient, but that's how it was.
[Guest]: So he, you know, so Hemu collapsed and so did the rest of his army.
[Guest]: And so then, you know, that battle is won, you know, partly by luck.
[Guest]: But after that, it's not I mean, luck doesn't get him through, you know, the next 50 odd
[Guest]: years that he lives and goes from strength to strength to strength, sorting down rebellion
[Guest]: after rebellion after rebellion.
[Guest]: And so many people are vying for power.
[Guest]: And you know, not only is he doing that, not only is he increasing his physical geography
[Guest]: of his realm, just sort of going from one conquest to another, he's also changing its
[Guest]: systems.
[Guest]: So he's back from, you know, conquering Gujarat and he sits down, he says, now let's rethink
[Guest]: our revenue model or our, you know, administration or how we organize the Mansabdars.
[Guest]: He's very interested in all of that.
[Guest]: Then he's also doing this, you know, he's got these great translation projects, he's
[Guest]: got building projects, he's got music and all of that.
[Guest]: I mean, you know, so all of this is going on at the same time.
[Guest]: This is a man who, I mean, reading about him, you feel a little exhausted.
[Guest]: You know, he just never stops.
[Amit Varma]: It must be like literally a one in a millennium chance that all of these qualities converge
[Amit Varma]: upon one person.
[Amit Varma]: He fits the role of the great conqueror.
[Amit Varma]: He's also a great public policy man to use modern terminology where he's reforming his
[Amit Varma]: tax revenue systems and his systems of governance and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: At the same time, he's a great patron of the arts, partly with the help of all these painters
[Amit Varma]: whom Arjun brought back from Persia famously and which tradition, which is Sanjay Hangeer,
[Amit Varma]: of course, continues to great with great success.
[Amit Varma]: And also he is a serious intellectual.
[Amit Varma]: He's thinking about religion, all of these different ideas, trying to weave these strands
[Amit Varma]: together.
[Amit Varma]: And he finally has a son and the son sits around drinking all day and examining animals
[Amit Varma]: and shows no interest in conquest, keeps making excuses to kind of, I mean, one of the themes
[Amit Varma]: that ran through your book is that your book is full of basically a father sending a son
[Amit Varma]: to conquer something or the other.
[Amit Varma]: Quite often the decan and the son is making excuses and he's going here and he's going
[Amit Varma]: there and you know, Akbar sends all his kids to do this and they all kind of make a mess
[Amit Varma]: of it.
[Amit Varma]: And Jahangir then sends, you know, eventually Khurram has a semi success of sorts.
[Amit Varma]: And I was kind of interested by the, you know, again, just to talk a little bit about drinking
[Amit Varma]: and addiction, because as we were, you know, chatting while coming here, I was sort of
[Amit Varma]: a professional poker player for five years.
[Amit Varma]: I've seen people addicted to gambling, I've written columns about addiction and it kind
[Amit Varma]: of and I'm again just thinking aloud and tell me what your response is that I think a lot
[Amit Varma]: of people have addictive personalities, but what they're addicted to is not specifically
[Amit Varma]: thing A or thing B or activity C, it's dopamine to the brain.
[Amit Varma]: And the question is, where do you get that dopamine from?
[Amit Varma]: And in modern times, it could be safe from gambling, you push chips forward, you get
[Amit Varma]: dopamine rush to your head, it could be from playing online chess, which I think I might
[Amit Varma]: have been addicted to online chess, or it could come largely from social media as well.
[Amit Varma]: In today's day and time, where you know, every notification gives you a hit every like gives
[Amit Varma]: you a dopamine hit.
[Amit Varma]: But in those times, like when I try to imagine how are people spending their time all day,
[Amit Varma]: reading is not so common, there is no television, there are no movies, there is perhaps thankfully
[Amit Varma]: no cricket or people would be impaled, umpires would be impaled upon cricket fields.
[Amit Varma]: But there is a lot of wine and there's a lot of variety of wine.
[Amit Varma]: So if people are going to get addicted, they will get addicted to that and all of Akbar's
[Amit Varma]: children get addicted to it, you know, Murad and Dhani are the other two kids, they kind
[Amit Varma]: of so you know, what sort of your response to that and also just thinking about taking
[Amit Varma]: off from that?
[Amit Varma]: What's a typical day like in the life of, let's say somebody living under Akbar or under
[Amit Varma]: Jahangir?
[Amit Varma]: You know, what are they doing?
[Amit Varma]: How are they spending their time?
[Amit Varma]: How do they?
[Amit Varma]: I mean, I know it's a very nice question, which historians can scoff at me for asking.
[Guest]: Well, to the first part, we're sure, yeah, I mean, wine was plentifully obviously available.
[Guest]: And it wasn't just, you know, Akbar's sons who were addicted, but you know, the nobility
[Guest]: generally and the sons of the nobility generally like even you know, Man Singh's son, I think
[Guest]: he has, you know, four or five sons and of that, I think at least two or three die of
[Guest]: drinking.
[Guest]: And the Akbar Nama, Jahangir Nama, they're littered with the accounts of these sort of,
[Guest]: in fact, littered with corpses of men who have perished from drink.
[Guest]: But I suppose there was also, they have one or two alternatives.
[Guest]: Hunting was one.
[Guest]: Certainly, Jahangir, you could almost say addicted to it.
[Guest]: He does a census at one point asking, he wants to calculate how many animals he's killed
[Guest]: between the age of 12 and about 50 or so that he is when he orders the census.
[Guest]: And the amount comes to the rather obscene amount of 17,167 animals.
[Amit Varma]: Out of which you mentioned 10,000 are pigeons.
[Guest]: Yes, I was very pleased to learn this because it sort of, it makes me feel a little bit
[Guest]: better.
[Guest]: And 86, I think, were lions.
[Guest]: So there was at least one snake, as we know, if you count that.
[Guest]: And one rabbit.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, it could be argued that the rabbit would have died anyway.
[Guest]: Yeah, or maybe the rabbit escaped.
[Amit Varma]: Or the rabbit fell out.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, the rabbit fell out of the...
[Amit Varma]: The rabbit fell out.
[Guest]: Maybe the rabbit just...
[Amit Varma]: But a rabbit with severe post-traumatic stress disorder, if it's gone inside and outside.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: And so, you know, definitely that and I think the other thing, I mean, the Mughals do exhibit
[Guest]: a sense of tendency, not just towards addiction, but to kind of, you know, obsessive compulsive
[Guest]: sort of OCD type of behavior when it comes to record keeping amongst other things.
[Guest]: You know, they just, everything is noted down like in just ridiculous detail.
[Guest]: You know how, not just the contents of the treasury, but, you know, the ranks of elephants,
[Guest]: the ranks of mules, the, you know, the different sort of guns in the artillery, the, you know,
[Guest]: I mean, every conceivable thing is noted down and filed.
[Guest]: So, you know, and like this one of these Englishmen who travels there says that everything that
[Guest]: happens during the day in the emperor's life is written down by writers, including what
[Guest]: he eats, you know, and his sort of going to the necessity, all of that is meticulously
[Guest]: recorded.
[Amit Varma]: And it's interesting, you seem to be indicating that this is not just a matter of, you know,
[Amit Varma]: good efficient practice that you record everything, but there's something obsessive compulsive
[Amit Varma]: about it.
[Amit Varma]: So again, would go back to the thing of this also creates hits of dopamine in some way.
[Guest]: It seems to me, because you're like, why would you want such minute details of, you know,
[Guest]: recording?
[Guest]: And then it's very, very professionally done, you know, that I think there are 14 recorders
[Guest]: who work in shifts over the course of, you know, one week, two at a time, so that if
[Guest]: one misses something out, the other one catches it.
[Guest]: I mean, it's a professional meticulous enterprise.
[Guest]: So that would be another way of sort of getting the dopamine hits.
[Guest]: So but while you know, the daily life of the emperor was recorded in such minute detail,
[Guest]: daily life of an ordinary person is more difficult to access.
[Guest]: Yeah, you know, you get glimpses, you know, you get glimpses of, let's say in the in the
[Guest]: court, when you know, you have descriptions of how the court is arranged and how people
[Guest]: come and present their grievances or their demands or you know, what they what they want
[Guest]: to get, you get you get glimpses of the kind of gossip and talk that might be circulating
[Guest]: in the towns around the courts from some of these European writers.
[Guest]: And I think I particularly liked what he said, Thomas Rowe is very shocked, because he says
[Guest]: that, you know, whenever Jahangir makes a pronouncement, the minute he said it, it's,
[Guest]: he says it's available for every rascal on the street to discuss and criticize.
[Guest]: And he says, you know, that Jahangir is really locked in the schedule that he has of his
[Guest]: pre-dawn appearance and his, you know, the public darbar.
[Guest]: And he says, just as the people are his slaves, so is he in a kind of reciprocal bondage with
[Guest]: them.
[Guest]: So he can't deviate from his routine very much.
[Amit Varma]: And the daily situation is there's a pre-dawn sort of darbar, he comes out on the balcony
[Amit Varma]: in the same much like Amitabh Bachchan today, I guess.
[Amit Varma]: And then he takes a nap for two hours, and then he'll have his breakfast and all that
[Amit Varma]: with whatever with opium morning hit of opium.
[Amit Varma]: And then he has two darbars a day, you said one, you know, one before lunch, one after
[Amit Varma]: lunch and it's it all sounds I mean, it would drive me to drink if I had to work so hard.
[Amit Varma]: I was also, you know, struck by how, you know, like you point out at one time that one of
[Amit Varma]: the most common lines in Jahangir Nama is I summon the painters.
[Amit Varma]: And it almost strikes me that he's almost like an Instagrammer, except a few centuries
[Amit Varma]: before Instagram.
[Amit Varma]: So he can't whip out a smartphone and capture something.
[Amit Varma]: So whenever he wants to capture something, he'll do it the royal way, send for his painters
[Amit Varma]: and you know, a glacial pace Instagram.
[Amit Varma]: And you point to how the only life painting of a dodo really came from his court, which
[Amit Varma]: you reproduced in one of your talks, and it's a shockingly ugly bird.
[Amit Varma]: What can one say of this?
[Amit Varma]: And you also point out and there's another painting that, you know, you showed in one
[Amit Varma]: of your slideshows, which is on YouTube, which I encourage people to check out, where you
[Amit Varma]: showed this painting of this guy called Inayat Khan, a guy who was basically fell very ill
[Amit Varma]: and was practically emaciated and, you know, literally bones jutting out and he comes to
[Amit Varma]: Jahangir and ask for leave or whatever and Jahangir says fine, but first Instagram and
[Amit Varma]: he summons a painter and, and that painting seems very different from all other Mughal
[Amit Varma]: miniatures and all this almost like, like a Chittu Prashad painting of the Bengal famine,
[Amit Varma]: you know, very stark and, and this is how when you were researching this, how did you
[Amit Varma]: sort of access the paintings?
[Amit Varma]: Like, how do you get context of what these paintings are and what's going on here?
[Guest]: Like if one of the listeners of the show wants to do that for himself, is there a way to
[Guest]: do that online?
[Guest]: Yeah, many of these are available online.
[Guest]: If you look through, you know, through the museum, many of the museums put up their collections
[Guest]: online to view and, and also Jahangir talks about some of these things in the Jahangir
[Guest]: Nama.
[Guest]: So this Inayat Khan story he tells, you know, so then you know that this, this painting
[Guest]: exists.
[Guest]: Then he talks about the zebra that comes to his court that he has, that he has painted
[Guest]: and he's not sure if the stripes are real or not.
[Amit Varma]: So you get someone to try and wash the stripes off.
[Guest]: So you know that these paintings are there.
[Guest]: So yes, I mean, there are, there are hints in the Jahangir Nama itself.
[Guest]: Then of course, you know, from reading other writers, modern writers who talk about, particularly
[Guest]: Ebba Koch has written about, you know, art in Jahangir's time.
[Guest]: Then there's a writer called Asfar Moin who's also done a lot of very, very interesting
[Guest]: sort of close readings of certain paintings made during his time.
[Guest]: But I agree with you that Inayat Khan painting for me also was quite, both shocking in its
[Guest]: content and in the fact that it, it is so different from anything that I have seen of,
[Guest]: you know, there's something very sort of modern about it.
[Guest]: You know, it seems very contemporary, it could have been made and, and, and very haunting
[Guest]: and very not beautiful.
[Amit Varma]: And the guy actually died shortly after the painting.
[Guest]: He died the day after or something, within a day or two, he died.
[Guest]: So it is, it is really, it is a representation of death.
[Guest]: And it's, it's absolutely real.
[Guest]: There's no, there's, there's, there's no sort of prettification, there's no, there's no
[Guest]: soft edges.
[Guest]: It's, it's just his.
[Amit Varma]: Another very sort of interesting and endearing quality of Jahangir is sort of this endless
[Amit Varma]: curiosity about the natural world, which made me feel a little ashamed because, you know,
[Amit Varma]: I don't know if it's true of you, but I feel jaded about a lot of things, the wonder and
[Amit Varma]: awe of, you know, discovering new things and seeing something for the first time.
[Amit Varma]: And just wondering how does that work?
[Amit Varma]: It's just not there in me anymore.
[Amit Varma]: And you'd imagine a Mughal emperor would be far more jaded.
[Amit Varma]: And yet you have him telling his men to milk a lion, because he wants to see how that processes,
[Amit Varma]: you have the snake and the rabbit story.
[Amit Varma]: There's another story where he finds two different kinds of goats, you pointed out, and he gets
[Amit Varma]: them to mate because he wants to see what will come out of it at the same time using
[Amit Varma]: that I'm sure they would be tasty.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, there's another story about how a dog gives bites an elephant and the
[Amit Varma]: elephant dies of rabies.
[Amit Varma]: And Jahangir is like, yeah, there's something there, but he doesn't really explore it further.
[Amit Varma]: But how can something so small attack something so big?
[Amit Varma]: And my another story that actually ranks up there with the snake and the rabbit story
[Amit Varma]: is my favorite is a lion and the goat story.
[Amit Varma]: Where Khosrow's son, the Dabar Baksh gives him, you know, a lion and a goat who are coexisting
[Amit Varma]: in a cage.
[Amit Varma]: And he's curious about what kind of lion is this?
[Amit Varma]: Will this work with any other goat?
[Amit Varma]: He gets a goat taken out, look like goat is put in, immediately killed, puts in a sheep,
[Amit Varma]: immediately killed.
[Amit Varma]: And then the same goat is put back in and the lion treats it warmly and starts cuddling
[Amit Varma]: up with it.
[Guest]: Yeah, it's just amazing the stories from his time.
[Guest]: And he does that I think his curiosity is one of the most endearing things about him.
[Guest]: Without his curiosity, you know, he would be he would not because there are very I mean,
[Guest]: he has terrible, terrible cruelties and terrible sort of, I mean, there are many things about
[Guest]: him that are not attractive.
[Guest]: But this this is real appreciation of beauty and his boundless curiosity, like you said,
[Guest]: really make him and make his Jhangir Nama both so compelling, you know, as both as a
[Guest]: man and as a book.
[Guest]: And I think in one sense, I suppose you get, you know, reading it, the other thing you
[Guest]: realize is that the world was far less known at that time, you know, things were still
[Guest]: new.
[Guest]: You know, I mean, atlases and maps and globes were still like new things.
[Guest]: And you know, there's this story of about Thomas Rowe, in fact, and at some point, Thomas
[Guest]: Rowe presents Jhangir with an atlas.
[Guest]: And at first, Jhangir is quite curious about it.
[Guest]: And then he sends it back within a couple of days.
[Guest]: And Thomas Rowe realizes that the reason he's done this is because, you know, in those atlases
[Guest]: and even now in an atlas, as they're made, India appears much smaller than Europe, you
[Guest]: know, so he doesn't doesn't like the idea of his kingdom being smaller than any.
[Guest]: He's the emperor of the world, you know.
[Guest]: So, so the world is not fully known.
[Guest]: There's this amazing little bit where one of these other British Englishmen in his court
[Guest]: is William Hawkins, who spent about four or five years there.
[Guest]: And he he's come his last voyage was in the West Indies.
[Guest]: And Jhangir says to him, you know, I've heard of the West Indies.
[Guest]: I wasn't sure if it was a real place.
[Guest]: You know, I wasn't sure if it actually existed.
[Guest]: What is it?
[Guest]: And so, you know, so he tells him all about it.
[Guest]: And even, forget Jhangir, there's this Italian chap who's coming to India, Pietro Della
[Guest]: Valle.
[Guest]: And he's coming and on the way, you know, he talks about how he and the captain are
[Guest]: discussing unicorns.
[Guest]: And they're not discussing whether or not unicorns exist.
[Guest]: They're discussing on which latitude and longitude unicorns are found.
[Guest]: So the world is far more wonderful in some ways and full of wonder than it is today.
[Guest]: There's things still to be discovered.
[Guest]: And that said, you know, it can also be very frustrating sometimes when you're reading
[Guest]: what Jhangir and his curiosities, because the curiosity stops and it stops almost as
[Guest]: if there's this blind spot.
[Guest]: You know, like the thing you mentioned about the dog who gives, infects the elephant, right?
[Guest]: And Jhangir is like, oh, how can such a small creature make such a large creature ill?
[Guest]: And I just want to sort of shout out to him across the centuries, this is how infection
[Guest]: works.
[Guest]: You know, this is malaria.
[Amit Varma]: There's literally no way he can have the intellectual tools.
[Guest]: There's no way, exactly.
[Guest]: So you realize how much has changed, you know, how easy it is for us to make that connection
[Guest]: and how almost impossible it is for him.
[Guest]: Or even when, you know, there's another point of meteor, meteor falls somewhere nearby in
[Guest]: Jalandhar and everyone is very excited, of course, and Jhangir wants to see this metal.
[Guest]: But again, there's this sort of curtain that falls.
[Guest]: It's not, you know, beyond sort of making some knives and swords out of it.
[Guest]: There's no interrogation of what is this, where does it come from?
[Guest]: You know, even though astrology and astronomy are both sort of the highly developed skills
[Guest]: and passions at the time, natural meteor falling, just somehow you can, it's there it is.
[Guest]: You make your sword out of it and then it's finished.
[Guest]: It's just a full stop.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, you quote an Englishman named Henry Beveridge saying that Jhangir would have been
[Amit Varma]: a better and happier man as a head of a natural history museum, rather than, you know, an
[Amit Varma]: imperial emperor.
[Amit Varma]: Tell me also about, I mean, I mean, you know, you live in Delhi and we keep talking about
[Amit Varma]: the air quality index of Delhi and all that.
[Amit Varma]: How many people know that Jhangir was one of the pioneers of air quality index?
[Amit Varma]: Tell me a bit about his efforts at measuring pollution in Gujarat.
[Guest]: Yeah, so he went to Gujarat.
[Guest]: He had been in Mandu for a while and he'd really enjoyed it.
[Guest]: And he then he was going up to Ahmedabad and he'd heard a great, great thing about Ahmedabad.
[Guest]: He'd heard of, he was looking forward to going there.
[Guest]: And he arrived and immediately, almost immediately, he begins to complain.
[Guest]: He said, you know, what is this place?
[Guest]: It's a dust heap, he calls it.
[Guest]: And he says the air is just poisonous.
[Guest]: And he can't leave because there's a plague that's broken out in Agra.
[Guest]: So he can't go back to Agra and he's just more or less trapped.
[Guest]: And Ahmedabad, he falls ill.
[Guest]: He has to eat khichdi.
[Guest]: He says, I've not eaten khichdi since I was a child.
[Guest]: And I really had hoped I would never have to eat it again.
[Guest]: But here I am.
[Guest]: And so he, so anyway, to distract himself and to confirm his own theory, he orders this
[Guest]: experiment.
[Guest]: He has two sheep skinned and hung up, one just outside Ahmedabad and one in Mahmoodabad.
[Amit Varma]: And he has...
[Amit Varma]: Mahmoodabad in UP, of course.
[Guest]: In UP, of course, yeah.
[Guest]: And so, and the time, how long it takes for the sheep to start rotting.
[Guest]: And Jahangir is very right, because the one in Ahmedabad starts to rot, I think, in eight
[Guest]: hours or so.
[Guest]: And the one in UP lasts six hours longer.
[Guest]: And it lasts, it rots after 14 hours.
[Amit Varma]: So the rotting sheep air quality index is quite...
[Amit Varma]: And another big nugget for my listeners, William Hawkins, who Parvati just mentioned, of course,
[Amit Varma]: invented the modern pressure cooker.
[Amit Varma]: I'm just kidding.
[Amit Varma]: He didn't.
[Amit Varma]: Let's kind of, you know, you mentioned his cruelty earlier and a lot of it, you know,
[Amit Varma]: at one hand, when it comes to animals, for example, of course, he has this curiosity.
[Amit Varma]: He kills a snake trying to make it eat a rabbit.
[Amit Varma]: But he also, for example, you mentioned how someone gives him an elephant and it's night
[Amit Varma]: and the elephant needs to be bathed and he's feeling bad that all the water will be too
[Amit Varma]: cold.
[Amit Varma]: So the water is heated for the elephant to take a bath in.
[Amit Varma]: But on the other hand, he can be incredibly cruel.
[Amit Varma]: Like one example you point out is, and we'll of course, you know, talk about Khusrow and
[Amit Varma]: that whole politics later.
[Amit Varma]: Khusrow is his elder son who rebels against him and he chases him.
[Amit Varma]: And in fact, you know, while chasing him, he makes sacrifices like he doesn't take his
[Amit Varma]: morning dose of opium.
[Amit Varma]: He just runs off after Khusrow and then he reaches Lahore where there is biryani spread
[Amit Varma]: out for him and he notes in the Jahangir Nama that I would have loved to have the biryani
[Amit Varma]: but work awaits, possibly the only such sacrifice he made in his career.
[Guest]: He has one bite per man, then he has to run.
[Amit Varma]: And then he has to run after, you know, and so the cruelty, you know, the great example
[Amit Varma]: that, you know, really stuck with me and I was thinking about that was of Khusrow's lieutenants,
[Amit Varma]: Hussain Baig and Abdul Rahim.
[Amit Varma]: And I'll quote from your book here, quote, Hussain Baig and Abdul Rahim.
[Amit Varma]: This is after they've been captured and the rebellion has failed.
[Amit Varma]: Quote, Hussain Baig and Abdul Rahim were wrapped naked in animal skin.
[Amit Varma]: The badakshi, that's Hussain Baig, was stuffed into a freshly killed ox, Abdul Rahim into
[Amit Varma]: a donkey and mounted backwards on asses.
[Amit Varma]: They were paraded through the city.
[Amit Varma]: Hussain Baig died of suffocation, Abdul Rahim, perhaps because donkey skin is more porous,
[Amit Varma]: perhaps because he had supporters in the crowd who gave him water, survived, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And this is one just in terms of imagination, this seems crazy.
[Amit Varma]: But what also made me sort of laugh out loud was that Abdul Rahim was later reinstated
[Amit Varma]: and Jahangir would call him donkey.
[Amit Varma]: So and you know, and then the contrast to this is for another place you mentioned about
[Amit Varma]: how he once caught fish and he released them back into the water with pearls pinned to
[Amit Varma]: their noses.
[Amit Varma]: Why was this?
[Guest]: God knows he was the emperor, he could do what he liked.
[Guest]: I really don't know.
[Guest]: It just was.
[Guest]: Actually, that was one of those moments that struck me, you know, as as because some of
[Guest]: the reading of the Jahangir and getting to sort of know him as much as possible to, you
[Guest]: know, know a character from history was getting to know what it is to have almost limitless
[Guest]: power, you know, and you and you start asking yourself in the course of it, like, if I had
[Guest]: this kind of power, what would I do?
[Guest]: And would I not go a little mad?
[Guest]: You know, and I think it would be almost impossible not to.
[Guest]: So so if you have the power to release fish with pearls in their noses, I suppose why
[Amit Varma]: not?
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I think so.
[Amit Varma]: And there is there is also the sense, as you point out, that there are parts of the book
[Amit Varma]: where even Jahangir is surprised by the extent of his own power, such as when he's in court
[Amit Varma]: and a supplicant comes and says that I want to marry this widow, can you please persuade
[Amit Varma]: her?
[Amit Varma]: Then the guy says that I would jump from the highest tower to show my love and Jahangir
[Amit Varma]: says, OK, jump from there.
[Amit Varma]: And he points to a nearby thing and the guy runs and he jumps and dies.
[Amit Varma]: And Jahangir is like, what have what just happened?
[Amit Varma]: You know, and that is the power of the emperor.
[Amit Varma]: So how can it and despite that it you know, it's very hard one power because, you know,
[Amit Varma]: before he becomes emperor, which is not a done deal.
[Amit Varma]: And we've already sort of discussed about both how he, Murad and Daniyal, the three
[Amit Varma]: brothers were disappointments to their father.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, when he was pissed off at Jahangir, Akbar looked at Murad and then later Murad
[Amit Varma]: died of drink and he looked at Daniyal and Daniyal also died of drink in a fairly crazy
[Amit Varma]: incident.
[Amit Varma]: And then he turns to his grandchildren and he looks at Jahangir's sons.
[Amit Varma]: And in particular, Khosrow is a person, Khosrow is about 17 or 18 at the time.
[Amit Varma]: And he's thinking of propping him up.
[Amit Varma]: And what's that rivalry like?
[Guest]: Well, I mean, you know, I don't know, but I can only imagine what it must have been
[Guest]: like.
[Guest]: Because again, there are only hints, you know, for this.
[Guest]: Like, you know, Abul Fazal says, for example, cryptically, that the emperor always preferred
[Guest]: his grandsons to his sons.
[Guest]: And there's also, you know, just this, just a sort of stray fact that Akbar's grandsons
[Guest]: called him Shah Baba, you know, King Father.
[Guest]: And their father, Jahangir was Shahbhai, the king brother.
[Guest]: So this sort of hierarchy was very clearly, you know, the power was very clearly flowing
[Guest]: down from Akbar down to everyone below was sort of on a similar plane.
[Guest]: And so what it must have been like for Jahangir, I mean, it certainly it couldn't have been
[Guest]: easy to have to know that, you know, your own son is preferred over you for the throne.
[Guest]: And but it's not so much through him that we get to see how much tension there must
[Guest]: have been.
[Guest]: But through, you know, Khosrow's poor mother, who's Manbhai, who's also Man Singh's sister
[Guest]: and Jahangir's first wife.
[Guest]: And at some point, she commits suicide.
[Guest]: She overdoses on opium and dies.
[Guest]: And Jahangir writes about it again in the Jahangir Nama.
[Guest]: And he says, and he blames Khosrow.
[Guest]: He says, you know, she was so upset with Khosrow because he was behaving badly that she couldn't
[Guest]: take it and she killed herself.
[Guest]: And meanwhile, in the Akbar Nama, the blame falls squarely on Jahangir because, you know,
[Guest]: the Akbar Nama says that Jahangir treated her so badly and upset her so much that she
[Guest]: killed herself.
[Guest]: And of course, there's also the theory and the suggestion that she and in the family,
[Guest]: there was a kind of manic depression that ran in the family.
[Guest]: So, you know, she may also have been suffering from a depression of some sort, but still
[Guest]: there would, you know, there would have to be triggered.
[Guest]: And so it certainly can't have been fun.
[Guest]: And you know, it's obviously an increasingly, increasingly dysfunctional family.
[Amit Varma]: Your husband is fighting with your son who is backed by your father-in-law.
[Guest]: For the throne, for the empire of all Hindustan.
[Amit Varma]: And just again, you know, as we learn from Thomas Rose's writings, and I think William
[Amit Varma]: Hawkins, inventor of the pressure cooker, estimated that while the Mughal Empire was
[Amit Varma]: worth 56 million, England was half a million.
[Amit Varma]: So that was a difference.
[Amit Varma]: This was a mighty empire.
[Amit Varma]: There was a lot at stake.
[Amit Varma]: And also within Mughal dynasties, the way succession worked is it didn't automatically
[Amit Varma]: go to the eldest son, like it does in some dynasties.
[Amit Varma]: You know, there weren't any rules like that.
[Amit Varma]: So it was up for grabs.
[Amit Varma]: And of course, in Akbar's times, it was relatively gentle.
[Amit Varma]: The worst you might do what Jahangir at one point did to Khosrow was blind him because
[Amit Varma]: blind people, according to Islam, cannot ascend the throne.
[Amit Varma]: But Shah Jahan basically just killed off all contenders.
[Amit Varma]: And that sort of became more and more vicious, you know, one sort of counterfactual, if you'll
[Amit Varma]: sort of indulge me in this is what I've always wondered is one, it seems clear to me that
[Amit Varma]: Khosrow was admired and idolized by a lot of people possibly seems to be have been a
[Amit Varma]: lot more powerful than Jahangir and certainly had the support of all the women in the court,
[Amit Varma]: all the sisters and mothers and aunts who are so powerful and was respected by them
[Amit Varma]: and feared by his own brother Khurram, the later Shah Jahan, who had him sort of put
[Amit Varma]: to death and Khosrow, you could say had numerous chances to ascend to the throne one directly
[Amit Varma]: after Akbar or two just as Jahangir's son after Jahangir.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, he got like many second, there were many second acts in his life, and none
[Amit Varma]: of them worked out.
[Amit Varma]: The counterfactual here is that what if Khosrow does become emperor, and therefore neither
[Amit Varma]: Jahangir nor Shah Jahan ever kind of become emperor.
[Amit Varma]: Is there a drastic difference to history?
[Amit Varma]: Or would you expect the rest of Indian history to proceed along?
[Amit Varma]: Indirectly, what I'm asking you is what do you feel about say Thomas Carlyle's great
[Amit Varma]: man theory of history, which I assume you would say that look, Akbar certainly was a
[Amit Varma]: great man without him, India's history is completely different.
[Amit Varma]: Who could have built this empire?
[Amit Varma]: But you know, I look at Khosrow and I think that no one talks of Khosrow, but he was so
[Amit Varma]: close.
[Amit Varma]: And had he gotten it, you know, Jahangir and Shah Jahan and therefore Aurangzeb later might
[Amit Varma]: never have been emperors.
[Amit Varma]: Is that something you've thought about?
[Guest]: I haven't thought much, although you can't help feeling sorry for Khosrow if you read
[Guest]: about him.
[Guest]: Of course, he really does.
[Guest]: He's so close.
[Guest]: And he has such powerful support.
[Guest]: I mean, he has the support, probably possibly of his own grandfather, Akbar.
[Guest]: And he certainly has the support of Man Singh, his uncle, and his father in law, Mirza Aziz
[Guest]: Koka, who is Akbar's one of his closest, closest friends, advisors and his foster brother.
[Amit Varma]: And Man Singh, of course, was a governor of Bengal and perhaps one of the best generals
[Guest]: of the Mughal Empire.
[Guest]: Exactly.
[Guest]: So he had this powerful backing.
[Guest]: And then suddenly to have that snatched away, and then to be so clear in your own mind that
[Guest]: you deserve the throne more than your father does, that you then within six months, rebel.
[Guest]: And you know, he gets this, he gets enough support.
[Guest]: And yet he has terrible luck, and he clearly doesn't have as much experience in sort of
[Guest]: leading a rebellion.
[Guest]: So he's captured.
[Guest]: And as you said, his general meet this sort of gruesome punishment and the rest of them.
[Guest]: I mean, you know, he, Khosrow himself, is made to ride on sort of an emaciated elephant
[Guest]: through the gates of Lahore.
[Guest]: And on either side of him, you know, hundreds of his supporters are impaired.
[Guest]: So you know, dying gruesomely on either side of the road as he walks, marches past them.
[Guest]: And yet the same chap, I mean, obviously had some degree of charisma and appeal because
[Guest]: within again, a year or so, maybe a few months, he's managed to ferment another, you know,
[Guest]: rebellion, which is when sort of Jahangir has him blinded.
[Guest]: Though even that is possibly was a reversible blinding.
[Guest]: And because the eyes, the eyelids are sewn together, and then they can be opened.
[Amit Varma]: That's convenient.
[Amit Varma]: So if he changes his mind, if he changes his mind, yeah.
[Guest]: So there's some accounts that say that he, you know, at some point he was, his eyes were
[Guest]: opening yet, which is why he remained a threat to Khurram.
[Guest]: You know, otherwise, if he had been really blind, then Khurram need not have...
[Amit Varma]: No, and one of the anecdotes, which was really striking, and which made me think a little
[Amit Varma]: harder about Khosrow, what kind of man he must have been, is that you point out that
[Amit Varma]: much later in life, when, you know, Noor Jehan is a very powerful figure, and we'll talk
[Amit Varma]: about that a little while later.
[Amit Varma]: But what essentially, so she was married earlier to this guy called Sher Afghan, I think, and
[Amit Varma]: she had a daughter through Sher Afghan.
[Amit Varma]: And she was thinking of getting that daughter married to Khosrow, which would immediately
[Amit Varma]: make him a contender for the throne again.
[Amit Varma]: And Khosrow refused, because he wanted to be loyal to his wife.
[Amit Varma]: And his wife said that, No, no, this is good for you.
[Amit Varma]: This will finally get us out of the wilderness, you could be emperor.
[Amit Varma]: And he said, No, I'm not going to do it.
[Amit Varma]: And this blew my mind, who does this?
[Amit Varma]: You know, when it's so commonplace for these guys to have multiple sort of...
[Guest]: Yeah, although this is a story that is told.
[Guest]: So you know, it's possible he did, it seems like very foolish of him, if he did do that.
[Guest]: But it's also possible that he disliked Noor Deha very much, who knows, you know, maybe
[Guest]: he didn't trust her, maybe he didn't, you know, because it was, it was difficult.
[Guest]: But, but all he just made the very wrong choice.
[Guest]: But but you know, to come back to what you're saying about what would have happened if he
[Guest]: had been, if he, I don't know, I think, to me, if you look at how the empire first grows
[Guest]: and then sort of collapses upon itself, you know, succession is, of course, one part of
[Guest]: it.
[Guest]: But and this idea that there's no primogeniture amongst the Mughals, so there isn't, you know,
[Guest]: but there was, it's not like there wasn't a system and the system would be to sort of
[Guest]: divide the empire amongst different heirs.
[Guest]: And you know, one of the most interesting things that I've been reading, I've been reading
[Guest]: about Humayun a little bit in the last few months, and you know, there is this suggestion
[Guest]: that towards the end of his reign, Babur was beginning to feel about Humayun very much
[Guest]: as Akbar was feeling about Jahangir, that the staff was not up to it, you know, that
[Guest]: so he didn't want to, he was anyway he had parceled out, I think he had given Kabul to
[Guest]: Kamran and I think perhaps Lahore and Punjab to Askari.
[Guest]: And he was he wanted to send Humayun to Badakhshan, but Humayun was posted there, he was not supposed
[Guest]: to be in Delhi, and Delhi and Agra would go to Babur's brother in law, who was married
[Guest]: to his sister Khanzada Begum, who is one of the most memorable characters in that family.
[Guest]: And she was very close to her.
[Guest]: So the suggestion is that in fact, he was going to make his sister, in a sense, the
[Amit Varma]: de facto Empress.
[Guest]: The Empress of this part of the empire, you know, and then they would sort of share and
[Guest]: then even under Akbar, I mean, Akbar becomes emperor of whatever little bit Humayun has
[Guest]: managed to get back.
[Guest]: His younger brother, Muhammad Hakim is in Kabul and he is sort of he and his mother
[Guest]: are the rulers of Kabul and Kabul remains a kind of autonomous region, even though you
[Guest]: know, Hakim rebels once or twice and Akbar sends in an army, but until he dies, Akbar
[Guest]: doesn't make Kabul into one of, you know, part of the empire.
[Guest]: But then, you know, the empire just expands and expands and expands.
[Guest]: And so then does the lure of it, you know, so by the time you come to Shah Jahan and
[Guest]: then to Aurangzeb, the stakes are so high that and the greed also then, you know, it
[Guest]: multiplies by leaps and bounds and so does the venality and the murderous impulses.
[Guest]: So you know, unless Khosrow had lost the empire, he had to begin again from scratch.
[Guest]: If he had been as successful as Jahangir was and there's no, it's not necessary that he
[Guest]: might or might not have been because Jahangir, I don't think would have taken it lying down.
[Guest]: And he would have had a he did have a very strong support, you know, and he would have
[Guest]: he would have attracted support also.
[Guest]: He was not bad at creating alliances and drawing people to him.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, one of the interesting things that, you know, after he won the battle of succession,
[Amit Varma]: which I'll ask you about, one of the things he did was he forgave many of the people who
[Amit Varma]: were against him, you know, almost like, you know, Lincoln and the team of rival things
[Amit Varma]: where, you know, he forgave all these people, even in the example of, you know, Abdul Rahim,
[Amit Varma]: who was stuffed in donkey skin and paraded through, but ultimately back in the court.
[Amit Varma]: So he was obviously a very interesting kind of statesman.
[Amit Varma]: He wasn't completely incompetent.
[Amit Varma]: He was making his sort of alliances and stuff.
[Amit Varma]: Let's take a quick commercial break now.
[Amit Varma]: And we'll come back after that and talk more about the fascinating life of Emperor Jahangir.
[Unknown]: Hey, everybody, welcome to another awesome week on the IBM podcast network.
[Unknown]: If you are not following us on social media, why the hell aren't you?
[Unknown]: It's about time that you did.
[Unknown]: We are IBM podcast on Instagram, Facebook, and Twitter.
[Unknown]: We also got some really great news about Pesa Vesa.
[Unknown]: Anupam Gupta, our host, we couldn't be prouder of him.
[Unknown]: His show has won the award for the best business podcast at the Asia Podcast Summit.
[Unknown]: Couldn't be happier, couldn't be prouder.
[Unknown]: Definitely check it out if you haven't heard it.
[Unknown]: It is an award winning podcast now officially.
[Unknown]: I also would like to thank our sponsors this week, Storytel and Intel.
[Unknown]: Sponsors make this possible.
[Unknown]: So please support our sponsors, tweet at them, tell them that you're happy that they're sponsoring
[Unknown]: the podcasting space.
[Unknown]: We're excited to announce our new show, Storytellers and Storysellers, hosted by Vineet Kanabar.
[Unknown]: Every episode, he talks to two guests, one from the creative side and one for the business
[Unknown]: side of the entertainment industry.
[Unknown]: This week, Vineet is joined by executive creative director of TVF and storyteller Saurabh Khanna
[Unknown]: and chief strategy officer, OML and storyseller Tarun Tripathi.
[Unknown]: Together they break down what goes into making a branded web series.
[Unknown]: Tune in to new episodes every Thursday.
[Unknown]: And Cyrus says Cyrus is joined by Utsav Mamoria.
[Unknown]: Utsav is the host of our new show and one of my favorites on the network, Postcards
[Unknown]: from Nowhere.
[Unknown]: He and Cyrus have a really interesting conversation about Utsav's fandom of Cyrus.
[Unknown]: Also, they talk a lot about travel and Utsav's recent marriage.
[Unknown]: Two of our shows reached their 50th episode this week.
[Unknown]: On Puliya Bazi, Pranay and Saurabh talk to Nidhi Gupta, who researches and teaches behavioral
[Unknown]: economics.
[Unknown]: They discuss insights from Nobel laureate Daniel Kahneman's classic, Thinking Fast
[Unknown]: and Slow.
[Unknown]: And on the 50th episode of Paperback, Rachita and Satyajit talk to the best-selling author
[Unknown]: Ashwin Sankhi about his perspectives on mythology, history and writing historical fiction.
[Unknown]: On the Filter Coffee podcast, Karthik is joined by CEO and managing director of Fireworks,
[Unknown]: Sunil Nair.
[Unknown]: Sunil shares his insights about Fireworks technology, his time at Alt Balaji and differentiates
[Unknown]: advertising for an OTT platform versus television.
[Unknown]: On Advertising is Dead, Varun is joined by Tess Joseph, a renowned casting director.
[Unknown]: They talk about her journey in the film industry.
[Unknown]: On Mr. and Mrs. Binge Watch, Janice and Anirudh discuss the pros and cons of the newly launched
[Unknown]: Apple TV Plus service and review some flagship shows on the platform.
[Unknown]: This week on Edges and Sledges, Ashwin, Varun and DJ talk about the first India vs. Bangladesh
[Unknown]: test and IPL transfers.
[Unknown]: On GayBCD, Sunetra and Farah talk about how they face discrimination as kids for choosing
[Unknown]: to do things against gender norms.
[Unknown]: On Postcards from Nowhere, Utsav, who is on Cyrus this week if you have forgotten, talks
[Unknown]: about witnessing Kerala's famous martial art, Kelari Pattu.
[Unknown]: And with that, let's get you on with your show.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome back to the scene in the unseen.
[Amit Varma]: I'm chatting with Parvati Sharma, the author of an entertaining biography of Jehangir and
[Amit Varma]: entertaining why not just because of the delightful style of writing, but also because history
[Amit Varma]: is entertaining.
[Amit Varma]: These are incredible stories.
[Amit Varma]: You can't make this shit up.
[Amit Varma]: You know, while we were at the break, you sort of told me that, you know, you went back
[Amit Varma]: to my earlier question about how ordinary people lived in the Mughal Empire, because
[Amit Varma]: what do they do?
[Amit Varma]: They don't get up in the morning and look at their smartphone and complain about the
[Amit Varma]: battery.
[Amit Varma]: So, so tell me a bit about, you know, what insights you gained on that from reading the
[Amit Varma]: literature of this period.
[Guest]: No, so there was, you know, it wasn't so much insight as just these sometimes these really
[Guest]: vivid glimpses of moments in everyday life, you know, and, you know, amongst them, for
[Guest]: example, and many of them come from the sort of European writers, because they are the
[Guest]: ones who, you know, recording what it is to live every day or to the sites that they see
[Guest]: for their audiences back home.
[Guest]: So, you know, somebody, one of them very bitterly, in fact, writes about how, you know, people
[Guest]: in some villages, he sees women and children wearing necklaces of, of clothes, you know,
[Guest]: because clothes are so, so, so cheap here.
[Guest]: And this poor man is trying to, he's a Dutch trader and he's bringing spices from the Spice
[Guest]: Islands to India, but you know, he's not able to make very much money for what he brings.
[Guest]: And he has to spend more than he has on what he needs to buy.
[Guest]: Or you have, you know, another, another writer who arrives in Gujarat.
[Guest]: So he's writing about Cambe and then about Surat.
[Guest]: And he presents this very dynamic view of these, you know, bustling cities with these
[Guest]: bullock carts racing through the streets with, you know, the bells on the, on the necks of
[Guest]: the, of the, of the bulls ringing loudly to, to alert everyone.
[Guest]: He talks about hospital, animal hospitals, you know, and hospital, I mean, obviously
[Guest]: for larger animals like gaushalas and all, but also hospitals for, for mice and for birds
[Guest]: and you know, and, and he presents also this, you know, picture of, of, you know, tanks
[Guest]: built at regular intervals as, you know, water or access to water is something that is provided
[Guest]: as a philanthropic act by the richer people in a town or a city.
[Guest]: And also, you know, you know, what, what also, you know, so what struck me was how they talk
[Guest]: about, how they talk about religious freedom, because, you know, they all, almost all of
[Guest]: them say that there's an extraordinary, as one of, as Pietro Dalla Valle says, an extraordinary
[Guest]: liberty of conscience in the realm of the Mughal.
[Guest]: That's a lovely phrase, liberty of conscience.
[Guest]: It is, and it sounds very, you know, 20th, 21st century, it sounds like, but people,
[Guest]: anyone is free to practice, not only to practice whatever religion they wish to, but also to
[Guest]: criticize the other, you know, and these are people who are coming from very sectarian
[Guest]: Europe where people are killing each other, you know, for, for differences of sect, let
[Guest]: alone religion.
[Guest]: And so they're always surprised to see what's going on here.
[Guest]: But they also, clearly defining it, they also notice this idea of purity that runs through
[Guest]: the India that they see and, you know, of, of, of castes.
[Guest]: And so there's a young, there's an Englishman who comes, while Thomas Rowe is here, and
[Guest]: he has this great idea of building public water supply in Agra.
[Guest]: And Thomas Rowe is really scathing, and he says, this guy, I mean, and you know, what,
[Guest]: what kind of stupid plan is this?
[Guest]: Because nobody will drink water that is not fetched by his own caste.
[Guest]: You can't have public water flowing like this, because nobody will touch it.
[Guest]: And Pietro della Valle, in fact, is in his, his sort of expat community, are so fascinated
[Guest]: by this idea of pure and impure touch that they improvise a little drinking game where,
[Guest]: you know, everyone is to drink their wine in the Indian fashion without touching the,
[Guest]: the cup to the lip.
[Guest]: And whoever spills it then loses, I suppose.
[Guest]: So, so you get, one of the things that you get actually from, from Jahangir, and it was,
[Guest]: it was to me really surprisingly vivid image was, you know, he's, he's also traveling in
[Guest]: Gujarat and he says the roads are lined with these sort of waste level shelves, you know,
[Guest]: and, and he says that they're there, so because porters, because there's so much trade, so
[Guest]: porters can rest their load on that shelf without having to take off the load from their
[Guest]: back.
[Guest]: It seemed like a very clever and considerate idea, you know, so, so, so yeah, so there
[Guest]: is this,
[Amit Varma]: In fact, when I, you know, read your book and read this bit about Gujarat and the porters
[Amit Varma]: relieving themselves, I was reminded of a tweet a few months back, I forget by whom,
[Amit Varma]: I vaguely seem to think it's one of the journalists who works at the Hindu, but I'm not very sure.
[Amit Varma]: But the tweet basically had a picture of this big shelf like thing somewhere in Tamil Nadu,
[Amit Varma]: and saying, do you know what this is for?
[Amit Varma]: And no one in the area, no one's really seem to have an idea what it was for.
[Amit Varma]: And the purpose was for laborer women who are carrying things on their head, they can
[Amit Varma]: rest it there.
[Amit Varma]: So it's at a slightly higher height than these shelves would be.
[Amit Varma]: And because no one does that anymore, thankfully, we have progressed beyond that.
[Amit Varma]: No one knows what these things are.
[Amit Varma]: They're like artifacts, like, you know, like, like a trivial Stonehenge, in a sense, what
[Amit Varma]: is this for?
[Amit Varma]: But now we know what that's for.
[Amit Varma]: And just knowing what it's for also gives you an image of sort, what kind of life must
[Amit Varma]: have been like, you know, you were mentioning sort of religious freedoms and all that.
[Amit Varma]: And of course, your book has a section on how, for example, the Mughals attitude towards
[Amit Varma]: sati, which is that they disapproved of it, but they didn't want to outlaw it entirely.
[Amit Varma]: So the instruction that Jahangir gave to his governors was that you talk to the woman concerned
[Amit Varma]: in every case, offer her inducements, tell her we'll give her a pension or look after
[Amit Varma]: her.
[Amit Varma]: And only when you're absolutely sure is of her own free will, then what do you do?
[Amit Varma]: You have to let it kind of proceed.
[Amit Varma]: But religion also brings me to the circumstances of his rebellion and eventually taking over.
[Amit Varma]: The rebellion, of course, is very funny in the sense Akbar sends, Murad is dead by now,
[Amit Varma]: I think.
[Amit Varma]: So Danyal is looking after Allahabad.
[Amit Varma]: And you mentioned how Akbar sends him to the Deccan, which is this constant sort of humorous
[Amit Varma]: leitmotif of this.
[Amit Varma]: And he sends him to Deccan and Danyal is messing up there.
[Amit Varma]: So Akbar goes after him.
[Amit Varma]: And at this point, Jahangir is sent on another campaign with Man Singh.
[Amit Varma]: But Man Singh has an emergency in Bengal where he is governor, so he leaves.
[Amit Varma]: And Prince Salim, as he then is surrounded by his hangers on decides to make a play for
[Amit Varma]: power, takes his army to Agra.
[Amit Varma]: What happens next?
[Guest]: Takes his army to Agra and is confronted by the wife, Kilij Khan.
[Guest]: Poor man, unenviable position because he has to hold and Jahangir and Salim's idea is to
[Guest]: raid the treasury.
[Guest]: So Kilij Khan has to keep Akbar's treasury safe while also not losing his own head to
[Guest]: Jahangir's well-known temper.
[Guest]: So which he is doing, he's negotiating and saying, standing firm, not letting Jahangir
[Guest]: in.
[Guest]: But who knows how things would have gone except luckily for Kilij Khan, Jahangir's grandmother,
[Guest]: Hamida Bhanu Begum, hears about this.
[Guest]: And she happens to be in Agra and she's just very shocked and dismayed.
[Guest]: And she sends word to say, what are you doing?
[Guest]: And I'm coming to see you.
[Guest]: And Jahangir is so embarrassed at this idea and doesn't want to, can't face his grandmother.
[Guest]: So he quickly gets on a boat and sails off to Allahabad, which is luckily vacant since
[Amit Varma]: Danyal is gone.
[Amit Varma]: And the sort of the interesting political economy angle behind Jahangir eventually winning
[Amit Varma]: the succession battle against Khosrow also was that, you know, Man Singh and Aziz Khoka
[Amit Varma]: of course supported Khosrow, as you said earlier.
[Amit Varma]: But the mistake they made, and we can only say it's a mistake in retrospect, is that
[Amit Varma]: rather than just announce him emperor and then try to, you know, work around that, they
[Amit Varma]: order sort of a council of statesmen and elders to decide on the issue.
[Amit Varma]: And their powerful faction of a powerful Sunni faction supports Salim and eventually he ascends
[Amit Varma]: to the throne.
[Amit Varma]: How much like what is the interplay happening here?
[Amit Varma]: Are these sort of traditional Sunni figures pissed off at Akbar because of, you know,
[Amit Varma]: all of Akbar's syncretic secularizing sort of activities and they're like, no, we must
[Amit Varma]: preserve our faith and that, you know, and Khosrow is Akbar's chosen one.
[Amit Varma]: So we will go for Salim.
[Amit Varma]: Is that, is religion an angle in all of this?
[Guest]: Religion is certainly an angle in all of this.
[Guest]: Akbar has pissed off the conservative, particularly the Sunni Muslims in and around his court,
[Guest]: because he has, of course, for his many heresies, he has proclaimed a whole new religion, forget.
[Guest]: So he's, you know, see the rumors about that he has forsaken Islam, that he's not Muslim
[Guest]: anymore.
[Guest]: And so people are, and he's taken away not just that, but he's also taken away power
[Guest]: from the clerics, you know, who had a great deal of power in the previous courts.
[Guest]: So they're not happy and Jahangir is very much playing to this gallery.
[Guest]: So while he's sitting in Allahabad, holding his rebel court, he's also issuing, you know,
[Guest]: fatwas once in a while saying that my father, what he's doing is very bad, very bad and
[Guest]: clearly indicating that he will not do this when he becomes emperor.
[Guest]: So he does have that.
[Guest]: He does have that support.
[Guest]: And but that said, it's, you know, things get very, so, so, so I know if you don't mind,
[Guest]: I'll give you a slightly tangential answer or digressing.
[Guest]: But you know, it's interesting to me, one of the things I thought while sort of writing
[Guest]: and thinking about this book, I mean, we think of the Mughals particularly, you know, I mean,
[Guest]: all historical characters, as we know them, perhaps because we have so many or perhaps
[Guest]: because of the way that we have understood our own history are thought of in sort of
[Guest]: black and white bullet point terms, you know.
[Guest]: And with the Mughals, that black and white bullet point tends to focus on this sort of
[Guest]: secularism and communalism, you know, and therefore, the greatest amount of writing,
[Guest]: thinking, debating goes on about this, you know, supposedly secular hero, that is Akbar
[Guest]: and this communal villain who is Aurangzeb.
[Guest]: And regardless of whether, you know, secular or communal are words that even make any sense
[Guest]: in the, you know, in the 16th and 17th centuries, this is how we understand them.
[Guest]: And even if we are trying to sort of rethink those categories, it's difficult to get out
[Guest]: of that trap, you know, either you're saying, oh, no, he was secular, no, he wasn't or secular
[Guest]: is not the right word.
[Guest]: But somehow those words have to, you know, he was or was not communal, but those words
[Amit Varma]: keep coming.
[Amit Varma]: And just thinking about, doesn't this tendency of thinking in these stark binaries carry
[Amit Varma]: on to the present day where we talk of Nehru or Ambedkar or Gandhi, or even Savarkar, who
[Amit Varma]: are all deeply complex figures and you know, cannot be pinned down into black and white.
[Amit Varma]: And that's how people make sense of the world and which is why we need historians.
[Guest]: And that possibly ties into the great man theory too, you know, when either, you know,
[Guest]: the great men of history are either great, greatly good or greatly bad.
[Guest]: And that's how they you know, that's how we understand them.
[Guest]: But the interesting thing and the nice thing about Jahangir is because he has no, nobody
[Guest]: is thinking of him as a great man of any kind.
[Guest]: And so he doesn't have this kind of, there's no pressure, you know.
[Guest]: So when you read his life, you can read it with a lot more detachment and see how he
[Guest]: wasn't just this or that, but he was this and also this and also this and also this
[Guest]: and also this, you know, all kinds of things.
[Guest]: So I guess one of the things, I mean, post Khosrow's rebellion, but because of it, early
[Guest]: on in his career is one of the, I suppose if you were thinking of Jahangir in purely
[Guest]: religious terms, one big blot on his career would be the execution of Guru Arjan Dev.
[Guest]: But once you start looking at it, you know, that story yields many kinds of possible interpretations.
[Guest]: And so one, of course, is that Jahangir talks about it again in the Jahangir Nama, it's
[Guest]: quite clear.
[Guest]: And there isn't any hint of there being any religious angle to it.
[Guest]: I mean, until then, Guru Arjan Dev and the Gurus and the Mughals had fairly decent relationship.
[Guest]: Guru Arjan Dev himself specifically and Akbar had met and got along and Akbar had given
[Guest]: him a grant and enjoyed talking to him and all that.
[Guest]: And perhaps because of this reason, Khosrow, when he rebelled, he was on his way to Lahore
[Guest]: and on the way he stopped at the Guru's hermitage and the Guru blessed him and maybe he gave
[Guest]: him some money, it's not entirely clear.
[Guest]: And later on, Jahangir finds out about this and he has him, he says, I had his property
[Guest]: confiscated and I had him executed.
[Guest]: But it doesn't seem at all as if this was anything more than a political act.
[Guest]: On the other hand, it's also possible that Jahangir was in some ways goaded to do this
[Guest]: by his advisors who would amongst them, number some of these Sunni clerics who would have
[Guest]: by, because by this time, Sikhism had sort of evolving as a religion and the Guru was
[Guest]: attracting more and more followers, both Hindus and Muslims.
[Guest]: And thereby being a political threat as well as much as.
[Guest]: Yeah, exactly.
[Guest]: Being a political and a religious threat to his, to Jahangir's mullahs, not to Jahangir
[Guest]: himself.
[Guest]: So it's possible, you know, that that was also happening.
[Guest]: And there's another story, not of another religious man who dies because of Jahangir.
[Unknown]: Shustri.
[Guest]: Yeah, Shustri.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: And I really like this story because he's, you know, so he's a Shia and he's an old man
[Guest]: by this time.
[Guest]: And at some point, about 1610 or so, Jahangir has him whipped.
[Guest]: And then he, soon after he dies, most likely as a consequence.
[Guest]: And there's this chap called Sajjad Rizvi who has a fantastic essay on all the wheels
[Guest]: within wheels within wheels that are going on here, you know, and it so, so, so Rizvi
[Guest]: says that it's possible that Shustri was pretending not to be Shia because of this sort of growing
[Guest]: Sunni influence in the court.
[Guest]: It was, he thought it was a good idea to do that.
[Guest]: And Jahangir has him whipped, not because he is Shia, but because he is pretending not
[Guest]: to be.
[Guest]: And by that pretence, he is casting an aspersion on Jahangir's liberality.
[Guest]: And Jahangir says also that he's making me look like a coarse and bigoted man.
[Guest]: And you know, how dare he cast this aspersion of bigotry on me.
[Guest]: And yet, you know, this Sajjad Rizvi goes on that it's also quite possible that it was
[Guest]: that sectarian Sunni court that had it in for this old, poor old Shia man.
[Guest]: And again, sort of arm twisted the emperor into having him whipped.
[Guest]: But Jahangir could not admit this because in his own sense of himself, there is no,
[Guest]: there is forget bigotry or tolerance, there is very little religious sense.
[Guest]: And Thomas Rowe puts it very well.
[Guest]: You know, Thomas Rowe says that he has been bred up without any religion.
[Guest]: And it was easy for me also to identify.
[Guest]: I think that, you know, there are many people who, so I have, you know, my father's Hindu,
[Guest]: my mother is Sikh, neither was particularly religious.
[Guest]: So, you know, when you're brought up without any kind of religion, you know, I know what
[Guest]: that, you know, what that means.
[Guest]: And then Thomas Rowe continues that.
[Guest]: So therefore, he's either the easiest man to convert or the most difficult because he
[Guest]: is willing to listen to everything, but he won't believe anything.
[Guest]: You know, he doesn't have that, that ability to have religious faith, you know, so he's
[Guest]: He'll watch the stripes of the zebra.
[Amit Varma]: Yes, yes, exactly.
[Amit Varma]: The Shusuri story was so mind blowing because, you know, when I heard about it, and from
[Amit Varma]: you, it was because it is almost rashmonic in its multiple points of views and its multiple
[Amit Varma]: pretenses that are at the surface level.
[Amit Varma]: Jahangir's claim is that I don't care whether he's Shia or Sunni, but the fact that he pretended
[Amit Varma]: was an affront to my liberalism and therefore that pretence deserves the punishment of death.
[Amit Varma]: But on the other hand, you point out the possibility that it was under pressure from the Sunnis.
[Amit Varma]: So he's pretending to be loyal to the Sunni faction who he needs for political reasons.
[Amit Varma]: And on the other hand, there is that he then needs to pretend perhaps to himself, perhaps
[Amit Varma]: to the world, that this is not the reason that he actually is liberal.
[Amit Varma]: So it's layers within layers.
[Amit Varma]: And it seems like, you know, if there's an Indian Kurosawa, this is such an incredible,
[Amit Varma]: I mean, your book is full of incredible subjects of the sort for novels or films or whatever.
[Amit Varma]: It's just fairly mind boggling to me.
[Amit Varma]: But you know, another interesting aspect of his sort of religious leanings and his sort
[Amit Varma]: of experiments is this interesting guy called Jadrub Ghusain.
[Amit Varma]: Who is Jadrub Ghusain?
[Guest]: He's not a Muslim.
[Guest]: So Jadrub Ghusain is very much not a Muslim.
[Guest]: He's a very, he's a sort of a Brahmin saint and ascetic.
[Guest]: And Akbar first finds him.
[Guest]: And then Jahangir goes to visit him.
[Guest]: Next he meets him in a cave near Ujjain.
[Guest]: And Jahangir is just amazed by his asceticism and, you know, his frugality.
[Guest]: And he, you know, he eats like three mouthfuls a day and he lives his entire life inside
[Guest]: this tiny little cave.
[Guest]: And Jahangir has it measured, of course, it's barely possible for a man to get inside.
[Guest]: And Jahangir goes to meet him and he meets him in private.
[Guest]: There's even a painting of that shows, you know, the Jadrub Ghusain and Jahangir talking
[Guest]: outside the cave and all the nobility very much on the fringes of that painting.
[Guest]: And he does this more than once in the Jahangir Nama.
[Guest]: And he meets him and he has very long, very detailed and clearly fulfilling conversations
[Guest]: because he says, you know, after one of them, he says that, you know, I was very happy to
[Guest]: meet him and I was very sad to depart from him.
[Guest]: And clearly this man also had some influence over Jahangir because there's an essay, I'm
[Guest]: forgetting, I think maybe Shirin Musfi has written this essay about how at some point,
[Guest]: you know, poor Khosrow is in jail or in captivity, but occasionally he's allowed more freedom
[Guest]: than at other times, you know.
[Guest]: So at some point you hear in Jahangir Nama, he says that I let Khosrow come to meet me
[Guest]: every day.
[Guest]: And it seems that it may have been that, you know, Khosrow's father-in-law, Aziz Koka,
[Guest]: went to Jadrub Ghusain and said, you know, could you please intercede on his behalf and
[Guest]: let him move around a little.
[Guest]: So he had, you know, he had that kind of influence on Jahangir.
[Guest]: And this idea of asceticism itself seems to have been something that attracted him.
[Guest]: In fact, there's even a painting of him where he's like a bear chested and you know, sitting
[Guest]: with...
[Guest]: Wearing a dhoti and sitting in this sort of ascetic pose.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I mean, I'm just thinking aloud and I could be completely wrong, but it seems
[Amit Varma]: to me just listening to both what you've said about his sort of religious quest, as it were,
[Amit Varma]: and also his curiosity about the natural world, such as dog biting the elephant.
[Amit Varma]: It seems to me that the curiosity itself is intense and genuine, but the quest is kind
[Amit Varma]: of shallow and that's not necessarily his fault because he is also limited by the tools
[Amit Varma]: at his disposal.
[Amit Varma]: While you can say that for someone like Akbar, for example, in the context of religion, it
[Amit Varma]: would seem that the, you know, both the impulse and the quest itself was deep and genuine.
[Amit Varma]: You know, he's actually going and meeting Arjun Dev and chatting with him.
[Amit Varma]: He's writing up to the Dine Elahi.
[Amit Varma]: And for Jahangir, it's like he just falls short in both those areas.
[Guest]: Does that make sense?
[Guest]: That it could, but also here I have to admit to my own inability, you know, one inability
[Guest]: of not being a historian and therefore not being, I mean, I don't have the languages,
[Guest]: I have just English.
[Guest]: So I can't read in Persian, I can't read in other languages.
[Guest]: And there is this text called Majlis-e-Jahangiri, which records some years of Jahangir's evening
[Guest]: conversations.
[Guest]: You know, it's interesting because I think it is Asfar Moin perhaps who pointed this
[Guest]: out that, you know, I mean, many people say that, for example, in the Jahangir Nama, there
[Guest]: is no mention of Thomas Rowe.
[Guest]: And that can be taken as a mark of how insignificant Thomas Rowe was.
[Guest]: But it's also possible, this is what Moin I think says, that in the Jahangir Nama, Jahangir
[Guest]: is writing about his days, but not about his nights.
[Guest]: The evenings are when he has these conversations with people, both the spiritual religious
[Guest]: conversations and the conversation with ambassadors and visitors and all that.
[Guest]: And some of that is, I mean, it's not recorded by him, but there is this record by another
[Guest]: visitor to his court who records some of these religious conversations that he has with various
[Guest]: clerics and priests who come to his court.
[Guest]: So, now I don't know, you know, only that I've only been able to, it's not been translated.
[Guest]: So I've only seen a little bit here and there quoted in essays, but it's possible that that
[Guest]: reveals a deeper quest, I mean, you know, or at least a deeper interest in these matters.
[Guest]: He does, you know, he does, it seems, you know, so Akbar has this idea of Sulaykul,
[Guest]: the peace for all, which becomes a kind of motto for his reign.
[Guest]: And Jahangir, according to little extracts from this book, describes himself as Mazar-e-Kul,
[Guest]: which translates as a sort of universal manifestation.
[Guest]: He says that even the way that God takes care of all his slaves, so I take care of all God's
[Guest]: slaves, you know, through his own idea of what religion means, of what it means to rule
[Guest]: over different religions.
[Guest]: I don't know how deep or sophisticated they were, but they perhaps are more than we can
[Amit Varma]: gather only from the Jahangir.
[Amit Varma]: And his instinct seemed to be fairly liberal, as we would call it today.
[Guest]: Oh, so Thomas Rowe has this, there's a little bit in Thomas Rowe where he talks about how
[Guest]: he, you know, at some point, Jahangir is in his gups, and he starts talking about liberality
[Guest]: towards all religions, and Thomas Rowe says he sort of starts crying, because he's so
[Unknown]: moved by his own good intentions.
[Guest]: So yes, that idea, certainly, and you know, because he is the product himself of so much
[Guest]: intermingling, you know, he is, he has a Hindu mother, he has a Hindu mother, he has lived
[Guest]: his entire life in Hindustan, you know, he this is his country and, and to me the, you
[Guest]: know, the most telling thing is his taste in food, you know, so you have, you have Babar
[Guest]: who comes here, and he, for the very few years that he's here, he's really missing his melons,
[Guest]: he even literally cries when a shipment of melons arrives in Agra from Kabul, he can't
[Amit Varma]: believe it.
[Amit Varma]: And modern nationalists would find more reason to dislike Babar because he also says bad
[Amit Varma]: things about mangoes.
[Guest]: He says mangoes are okay, okay.
[Guest]: He says they're a do, but they're nowhere near.
[Guest]: They're not melons.
[Guest]: And then Jahangir at the beginning of his journey goes to Kabul and almost like it's
[Guest]: like a mirror effect, you know, he says almost exactly the opposite.
[Guest]: He says that all the fruits are very nice in Kabul, he has some cherries, he has some
[Guest]: peaches, he has apricots, melons, you know, he says fruits are all very well, but he says
[Guest]: nothing can match a mango.
[Amit Varma]: And this is this is really interesting.
[Amit Varma]: And actually, you know, question I was saving for the end of the episode, but I'll ask you
[Amit Varma]: now is this gradual journey where what is essentially a Timurid dynasty, a Timurid people,
[Amit Varma]: they bring their languages with them, their, you know, their harems and all the women and
[Amit Varma]: whatever and, and gradually what happens is that one, they get more and more Hindu because
[Amit Varma]: if you think about it, Jahangir is half Hindu, and his sons even more than that, because
[Amit Varma]: some of his wives are, you know, Rajput princesses or whatever.
[Amit Varma]: And not only are they in terms of their bloodline and so on getting more and more Hindu and
[Amit Varma]: more and more Indian rather, but even culturally, they're losing those old languages, they're
[Amit Varma]: losing those sort of old ways.
[Amit Varma]: And it would seem that it's, you know, around this time that you know, that Jahangir that
[Amit Varma]: line is drawn that they are now an Indian dynasty that the past is behind them that
[Guest]: you know, wherever they came from Uzbekistan or whatever, it's in the past.
[Guest]: Yeah, this idea that you know, one day we will conquer Samarkand remains, I think, certainly
[Guest]: all the way up to Aurangzeb, but it remains really as an idea, you know, that lip service,
[Guest]: although they try, I think there's some disastrous campaign that Aurangzeb is sent off on by
[Guest]: Shah Jahan.
[Guest]: But it's not, I mean, for Babur, that was it.
[Guest]: That was all he wanted was to be king of Samarkand.
[Guest]: That was home and that was his ultimate ambition.
[Guest]: You know, that was Timur's capital and that was what he wanted to be.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, I was just reminded by another TIL moment which quizzers would like which I got
[Amit Varma]: from your book, which is about the origin of the word wilayat.
[Amit Varma]: And you point out how, you know, the term originally means home.
[Amit Varma]: And it was, you know, Jahangir said it of Kabul or Jahangir said it of Kabul and he
[Amit Varma]: meant it as home.
[Guest]: But over time, it has come to mean the opposite.
[Guest]: Yeah, exactly.
[Guest]: I was also quite taken aback by that.
[Guest]: It meant sort of homeland or the land of the, you know, ancestors.
[Guest]: And it's the meaning is completely turned around.
[Amit Varma]: And it kind of depends on who you like.
[Amit Varma]: For example, if an Englishman uses it off England, he is talking of England as his wilayat,
[Amit Varma]: his home.
[Amit Varma]: But then when an Indian starts calling it wilayat, picking up from him, the meaning
[Guest]: changes and somehow that new meaning.
[Guest]: Exactly.
[Amit Varma]: The real meaning.
[Amit Varma]: And that was just, you know, so, so fascinating to me.
[Amit Varma]: Let's the kind of the really fast.
[Amit Varma]: One thing I learned recently about the Mughals and it's really fascinated me and I did an
[Amit Varma]: episode on Ira Moukhati with it on her excellent book Daughters of the Sun.
[Amit Varma]: It's about the women, the Mughal women, and even in your book, there is a very prominent
[Amit Varma]: role played by the women starting with Hamida Banu Bekum, of course, Akbar's mother, Humayun's
[Amit Varma]: bride from Afghanistan, who is, you know, who Jahangir is so scared of that when she
[Amit Varma]: says, I'm coming to see what the hell you are doing, trying to rob the treasury, he
[Amit Varma]: runs off to Allahabad.
[Amit Varma]: And later, one of the sort of things that really struck me about the legendary Nur Jahan
[Amit Varma]: is that, again, you've pointed out that being an emperor, Jahangir could have any woman
[Amit Varma]: he wanted.
[Amit Varma]: And what he chose, who he fell in love with and stayed so loyal with and build this enduring
[Amit Varma]: friendship and partnership with was a widow in her mid 30s.
[Amit Varma]: And this whole attitude towards women, the way they revere and respect the women, you
[Amit Varma]: know, in their palaces and how much they listen to them.
[Amit Varma]: Tell me a little bit about that.
[Guest]: So, I mean, I think, you know, the more I read about the Mughals and their sort of extended
[Guest]: families, more sort of these very strong women come out, you know, they're just they're all
[Guest]: over the place.
[Guest]: Babur, you know, in his Baburnama, writes about his grandmother as being one of the
[Guest]: most important influences on his life and not just, you know, as grandmother, but also
[Guest]: as actually advisor on military matters and strategic matters.
[Guest]: Because he's 12 and he's taking over.
[Guest]: Exactly.
[Guest]: And he goes to her and she advises him on what to do and how to do it.
[Guest]: So and his sister, Khanzada, is very much, I think, in fact, Ira talks about it in her
[Guest]: book, there's a painting she has in her book in which Khanzada is part of a council, you
[Guest]: know, and she's I think she's she's the biggest figure in that council.
[Guest]: She's clearly the most important person in that in that council.
[Guest]: Then there are, you know, there's some there are others.
[Guest]: There's the Salima Sultan Begum, who's Bayram Khan's wife and later Akbar's wife, then Gulbadan
[Guest]: Begum, who is Akbar's aunt.
[Guest]: And all of these people play a very strong, important role in Jahangir's life.
[Guest]: There's also Hamida Banu is only one of Humayun's wives and Humayun has at least three who are,
[Guest]: you know, that's fairly rare for three wives to sort of remain known in history for fairly
[Guest]: big accomplishments.
[Guest]: One is, you know, the Haji Begum, his first wife, she builds the Humayun's tomb.
[Guest]: Then there's, you know, Hamida Banu, who, you know, first resists his overtures for
[Guest]: 40 days, 40 days it takes of him wooing her.
[Guest]: And one of his stepmothers finally persuades Hamida Banu with that eternal argument that
[Guest]: has been used to persuade, you know, women to marry.
[Guest]: She says that, you know, you have to marry someone.
[Guest]: So why not him as well as anyone else?
[Amit Varma]: And he's a fugitive right now, mind you, not an emperor.
[Amit Varma]: I think Shersaas Shatori is basically ruling what we call India at this time.
[Guest]: So, there is a fairly bad state and the state will become much worse very soon.
[Guest]: So his third wife, Mahachuchak Begum, who is youngest, sorry, youngest wife, who is
[Guest]: also the mother of Akbar's young half-brother, Muhammad Hakim, and is the de facto ruler
[Guest]: of Kabul and, you know, battles when Akbar sends one of his governors there, she throws
[Guest]: him out and goes to battle with him and defeats him, you know.
[Guest]: So there are many examples of very, very strong women in the life of Jahangir and Jahangir
[Guest]: himself is indebted to at least three of them, this, you know, Hamida Banu, his grandmother,
[Guest]: Salima Sultan and Gulbadan Begum for interceding with Akbar on his behalf, you know, keeping
[Guest]: the relationship at least somewhat civil on sort of more or less working terms so that,
[Guest]: you know, it doesn't become completely ineligible.
[Amit Varma]: And as you pointed out, the later intercede with Jahangir on Khosrow's behalf.
[Guest]: No, but they do on behalf of Mirza Aziz Khoka.
[Guest]: So Jahangir wants to, he's, you know, always had a thing in it because Mirza Aziz has supported
[Guest]: Khosrow.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: And so when he gets his opportunity, he wants to certainly put him in prison, possibly worse.
[Guest]: But the women are listening from behind the screen and they call out and they stop him.
[Guest]: So yeah, so they have an influence on and thereafter, you know, Nur Jahan, she becomes
[Guest]: as powerful as she does.
[Guest]: And it's exceptional, but it doesn't happen in a vacuum.
[Amit Varma]: You know, there's enough precedent for powerful women.
[Amit Varma]: And it's interesting that, you know, even Nur Jahan's origin story is kind of, you know,
[Amit Varma]: interesting how she was again, not an Indian per se, not like one of the other Rajput princesses.
[Amit Varma]: And tell me a little bit about that.
[Guest]: So she comes fleeing from Persia with her, no, she doesn't come, sorry, her parents come
[Guest]: fleeing from Persia.
[Guest]: She is born en route in Kandahar.
[Guest]: And then, so there is this, what is called the abandonment narrative and the abandonment
[Guest]: of Nur Jahan that, you know, they have, her mother delivers her, but they are poor, they
[Guest]: are in, it's a difficult journey.
[Guest]: They don't have any, they don't know how they'll be able to take care of her.
[Guest]: So they leave her under a tree.
[Guest]: But they only walked a little while before, you know, my parents decide this is not, they
[Guest]: can't do this.
[Guest]: So her father goes back and he finds her with, you know, sort of a black snake wrapped around
[Guest]: her or, you know, some variations on that theme.
[Guest]: And then picks her up and brings her to Agra.
[Guest]: But this is not, I mean, this is not a story that, this is a little, you know, sort of
[Guest]: a sort of myth making of Nur Jahan.
[Guest]: There's no such story told.
[Guest]: I mean, Jahangir certainly doesn't tell it.
[Guest]: So, but whatever it is, they came, they were refugees.
[Guest]: There were many refugees coming in from Persia at the time.
[Guest]: And they found employment in Akbar's court, her father, he asked big.
[Guest]: And then, I mean, he's doing fairly okay, but nothing spectacular.
[Guest]: And under Jahangir, his career is arrested for quite a while.
[Guest]: He is himself arrested, in fact.
[Guest]: And his son is, one of his sons is arrested and killed for being part of Khosrow's gang.
[Amit Varma]: Khosrow's second rebellion.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: So, so things are not looking very good for them.
[Guest]: And then in 1611, so six years after he becomes emperor, Jahangir marries Nur Jahan.
[Guest]: And then suddenly, you know, the fortune of the Agyasbeg family just goes through the
[Amit Varma]: roof.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, they all become incredibly powerful.
[Amit Varma]: And Nur Jahan is almost co-ruling with him in a sense.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, a common criticism, which you point out may have been motivated by Shah Jahan's
[Amit Varma]: sort of trying to rationalize his rebelling against Nur Jahan.
[Amit Varma]: And the king was sort of, oh, he wasn't really governing.
[Amit Varma]: He was a weak emperor.
[Amit Varma]: Nur Jahan did all the governing.
[Amit Varma]: So a real man had to come and get the job done.
[Amit Varma]: And the actual probable thing is that Jahangir was egoless in the sense of he was doing what
[Amit Varma]: was, he was sharing power with her.
[Amit Varma]: And by all accounts, they had a very close friendship as well.
[Amit Varma]: And he was sharing power with her because it was a practical thing to do that left him
[Amit Varma]: to hunt and to drink and do the sort of things that he kind of enjoyed.
[Amit Varma]: What also intrigued me was the sort of political games, like on the one hand, Khurram, the
[Amit Varma]: later Shah Jahan is married to her niece.
[Amit Varma]: But on the other hand, she then tries to get her daughter from her first marriage married
[Amit Varma]: to Khosrow.
[Amit Varma]: But Khosrow refuses allegedly, but Khurram anyway has Khosrow killed later.
[Amit Varma]: And that daughter ends up marrying the youngest brother, Sheryar.
[Amit Varma]: And Sheryar becomes a contender to the throne.
[Amit Varma]: But then eventually when, you know, and after Jahangir for a very brief while, Khosrow's
[Amit Varma]: son is sort of told that you are the king.
[Amit Varma]: And then Shah Jahan just has all of them knocked off.
[Guest]: It's a bloodbath.
[Guest]: It reminded me of you know, that that last scene, that last montage in the Godfather,
[Guest]: you know, when one after the other, all the competition is being is just shot through
[Amit Varma]: the head.
[Amit Varma]: He just wipes them out, but his son is Aurangzeb, so karma is on the way.
[Amit Varma]: But tell me also a little bit about like when most people think of Jahangir and thanks perhaps
[Amit Varma]: to Bollywood and Mughlai Azam, they think of Salim and Anarkali.
[Amit Varma]: Did Anarkali exist?
[Guest]: So there's no, I mean, I just feel very bad every time I have to say this, because I found
[Guest]: people I didn't realize until after I wrote this book and started talking to people how
[Guest]: fond people are of the story of Anarkali and Salim and how much, how people don't at all
[Guest]: like being told that she didn't exist.
[Guest]: Though, I mean, you know, I like, I mean, there's no particular evidence for her having
[Guest]: existed, except that there's this diary entry by a chap called William Finch, who's one
[Guest]: of those early East India Company traders.
[Guest]: And he goes here, again, he goes to Lahore and he says there's this tomb and the tomb
[Guest]: is of Imam Kali, translated as pomegranate blossom.
[Guest]: And she was, she was the Akbar's wife and Daniyal's mother.
[Guest]: And Shah Salim had a quote unquote to do with her.
[Guest]: So it's not at all the sort of epic romance that we have in Mughal-e-Azam, it's much more
[Guest]: sordid story that he tells.
[Guest]: But tomb is there.
[Guest]: I think the, I think the archaeological survey has offices there or something, there's a
[Guest]: sort of government office in that tomb.
[Guest]: From what I've read, it is said to be the tomb of one of Jahangir's wives, but not Anarkali,
[Guest]: but Sahib Jamal, who was the mother of his second son, Parvez.
[Guest]: Also, like it seemed to me that if she had existed and if, I mean, the story as it's
[Guest]: told, certainly as a story as it's told in Mughal-e-Azam does not hold water in the context
[Guest]: of, you know, Mughal family life, because class would certainly not have been an issue.
[Guest]: You know, if Jahangir could have as many concubines as he wanted, nobody would stop him.
[Guest]: And marry whoever he wanted.
[Guest]: In fact, there is an instance of him wanting to marry somebody that Akbar doesn't approve
[Guest]: of, you know, because he wants to marry Zayn Khan's, a nobleman's daughter or niece, and
[Guest]: he's already married to her niece and daughter.
[Guest]: So Akbar doesn't like this idea of, you know, marrying two women who are so closely related
[Guest]: to each other.
[Guest]: But Jahangir insists and eventually, you know, Akbar gives in and that's it.
[Guest]: There's no, you know, it doesn't become some huge issue.
[Guest]: So for all these reasons, it seemed to me that it wasn't, I don't find it particularly
[Guest]: credible, but, you know, who knows, maybe we'll discover something later.
[Guest]: But also I think what at some point, you know, you know, the stories that, I guess, you know,
[Guest]: when you're writing any book or any story, or even whether it's history or not, there
[Guest]: are certain stories you are more attracted to or want to tell more than others.
[Guest]: So I thought, you know, this idea of this young love fighting parental opposition is
[Guest]: a very nice story, but it has been told so many times.
[Guest]: And for me, the more interesting story, even if that Anarkali story is true, for me, the
[Guest]: more interesting story is the Noor Jeha Jahangir story.
[Guest]: You know, this, this, these, these two people who meet very much in their middle age, you
[Guest]: know, by even by today's standards, let alone those times, she's in her 30s, he's in his
[Guest]: 40s.
[Guest]: They have both been married before, not just...
[Amit Varma]: Kindly watch your words by today's standards, 40 is very young.
[Guest]: 40 is very young, I know.
[Guest]: It's the new 30.
[Guest]: 40 is the new late 20s.
[Guest]: So I just turned 22.
[Guest]: So yeah, so, so this idea of, you know, I mean, he's, of course, been married, he's
[Guest]: much married, but she also is not, you know, she's not, she's her second marriage, too.
[Guest]: She already has a child by her first marriage.
[Guest]: They don't have any children together.
[Guest]: He never married again.
[Guest]: After that, she's his last wife.
[Guest]: They seem to share a relationship of some degree of equality, some degree of mutual
[Guest]: respect.
[Guest]: They clearly have similar interests.
[Guest]: You know, I mean, he is addicted to hunting.
[Amit Varma]: We've already started.
[Amit Varma]: She's supposed to be a really good shot.
[Guest]: She's supposed to be a really good shot.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: And you know, he has an interest in sort of jewelry and clothes and beauty.
[Guest]: So does she, you know, she's sort of that.
[Guest]: The tomb of her father, Itimad-ud-Daulah's tomb in Agra is really a really gorgeous little
[Guest]: monument.
[Guest]: So they have both have a very finely developed aesthetic sense.
[Guest]: They both enjoy, you know, feasting and partying and traveling, you know, they travel together
[Guest]: up and down the country.
[Amit Varma]: There's a very nice anecdote in your book about the lights of the city going off because,
[Amit Varma]: you know, they're coming back from somewhere together in a bullock cart.
[Amit Varma]: He's riding a bullock cart and she's by his side and his people feel the emperor should
[Amit Varma]: not be seen like this.
[Amit Varma]: But it's just a couple enjoying a really nice moment.
[Guest]: No, no, not the emperor not be seen like this.
[Guest]: So they've put off the lights because, so to keep her in purdah, because she's out,
[Guest]: she's sitting with him.
[Amit Varma]: So she's not, she's not, she's not.
[Amit Varma]: The absence of light as a purdah of sorts.
[Guest]: So the absence of light as purdah and this, you know, he's commanded a bullock cart from
[Guest]: somewhere and the two of them are riding.
[Guest]: I thought it's a lovely image.
[Guest]: And yeah, to me it captures something of their, something of the sort of carefree, that kind
[Guest]: of carefree love or carefree affection, which I think comes later in life.
[Guest]: You know, young passion is not, is not carefree in that way.
[Amit Varma]: This is a mature, settled love and it doesn't even seem to be so say affected by like, you
[Amit Varma]: know, we know power corrupts, power corrupts the road, people, especially the massive power
[Amit Varma]: that a Mughal emperor must have.
[Amit Varma]: But this seems to be quite removed from all of that.
[Guest]: It's just genuine affection.
[Guest]: It comes across.
[Guest]: And so that was the story that I liked that story better.
[Guest]: And so that was the one that I was more interested in, in English.
[Amit Varma]: That's a very powerful story.
[Amit Varma]: We've already spoken for more than a couple of hours.
[Amit Varma]: Tell me something.
[Amit Varma]: I see sort of four kind of divergent trends.
[Amit Varma]: And one trend is, of course, that history is used more and more these days as a political
[Amit Varma]: tool.
[Amit Varma]: It's simplified and you know, so you'll paint historical figures in either black or white
[Amit Varma]: and use it to suit your narrative purposes, whatever they might be, which indicates that
[Amit Varma]: simplistic narratives, maybe another illustration of this is the romance between the alleged
[Amit Varma]: and arcane and jungi that simplistic narratives have an appeal to us.
[Amit Varma]: We can all get it.
[Amit Varma]: Our mind is not a mind resist complexities.
[Amit Varma]: But yet I see in modern times in the last two or three decades in the rest of the world
[Amit Varma]: and maybe now over here with people like you and Manu Pillay and Ira Makhoti and Anna Safi
[Amit Varma]: coming along, that there is also this readership developing this hunger developing for popular
[Amit Varma]: history where people just love these stories.
[Amit Varma]: They can take the complexity, you know, they are not choosing simple binaries.
[Amit Varma]: There is a hunger for these and part of these I have mused in the past is perhaps because
[Amit Varma]: we love stories.
[Amit Varma]: That's how we explain the world to each other.
[Amit Varma]: And where can you get better stories than in our history, especially India's history
[Amit Varma]: is just wild and mind boggling and so entertaining.
[Amit Varma]: And these are two divergent things.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, one is history as a political tool being simplified binaries.
[Amit Varma]: But the other is that people just love history.
[Amit Varma]: What are your thoughts on this?
[Guest]: No, I think I think the way you put it is really that's it's true that you know, people
[Guest]: love history.
[Guest]: People also like at a certain level, I think in school particularly, you will find, you
[Guest]: know, that almost near near unanimous agreement that history is just the most boring subject
[Guest]: and maths is the most incomprehensible, you know, and possibly for similar reasons, because
[Guest]: they're both taught in these abstract terms that seem to have no relevance to to real
[Guest]: life.
[Guest]: You know, those mathematical formulas, I still don't know what it was that I was memorizing
[Guest]: and to what end.
[Guest]: And similarly, with, you know, this history and that's what we started off talking.
[Guest]: And at the same time, it's also you know, in our current political life, excites great
[Guest]: passions and you know, great anger.
[Guest]: And so, you know, I don't know if you've read this book that's come out recently called
[Guest]: Malevolent Republic.
[Guest]: Of course, by Kapil Kumar.
[Guest]: I just finished reading it.
[Guest]: I thought it was very polemical, very compelling.
[Guest]: I enjoyed it very much.
[Guest]: I don't know whether I agreed with every part of it, but it was very good.
[Amit Varma]: There were parts I didn't agree with, but it was extremely thought provoking and so
[Amit Varma]: well written.
[Amit Varma]: And in fact, I've asked Kapil to be on my show and he's agreed, but we've never actually
[Amit Varma]: managed to make, be in the same place at the same time.
[Amit Varma]: So one day we will make that work.
[Guest]: I look forward to hearing him talk.
[Amit Varma]: To continue with your thought.
[Guest]: So I felt very similar.
[Guest]: I mean, I enjoyed it very much.
[Guest]: And he has these asides, if you remember, on history and he and he and he basically
[Guest]: his argument is that a certain type of nationalist, mostly leftist historian has not been entirely
[Guest]: accurate about the past, has sort of papered over the sins of, you know, Muslim invaders
[Guest]: while only attacking European colonizers.
[Guest]: And I'm not sure if I entirely agree with this.
[Guest]: You know, there are there are many writings of many sorts on the many, many different
[Guest]: types of Muslim rulers that India has had.
[Guest]: But I do I think that that he's right in the sense that there has been a certain sense
[Guest]: of nation building that has informed the writing of history.
[Guest]: And it's not surprising, you know, in a postcolonial country when the entire country's every all
[Guest]: resources are concentrated on keeping the country one.
[Guest]: So naturally, history also comes into that.
[Guest]: So that I think perhaps accounts for the fact that, you know, history, the way that we are
[Guest]: taught it is all, you know, worthy, worthy, not just great men and women, but worthy men
[Guest]: and women, virtuous men and women who have been virtuously working from, you know, ancient
[Guest]: times from Buddha onwards, they were all working to make India sort of the nation state that
[Guest]: it is.
[Guest]: And the problem with that is, I mean, one, of course, that it turns history into something
[Guest]: that can be a little boring and, you know, just sort of talking down, kind of a morality
[Guest]: play more than anything else.
[Guest]: But also that it can be that it can be flipped, you know, so suddenly, you know, after the
[Guest]: decades of doing this, the country's sense of itself now depends on what happened in
[Guest]: the past or how we say what happened in the past.
[Guest]: So suddenly the country, you know, the nation wants to know why Aurangzeb did this, or,
[Guest]: you know, how dare he break these temples or what is Tipu Sultan doing in our textbook.
[Guest]: And so it becomes, there's something sort of disproportionate, you know, the past takes
[Guest]: on a disproportionate relevance to the present.
[Guest]: And then from there, of course, it almost way too easily that the present then has to
[Guest]: be spent writing these supposed wrongs from the past.
[Amit Varma]: And that doesn't spell very good news for us.
[Amit Varma]: And I think that comes both from the right and the left.
[Amit Varma]: My friend, the political commentator Sadanand Dhoomey was on the show a few months ago,
[Amit Varma]: and he made the very interesting point that whenever he appears on these TV talk shows
[Amit Varma]: with right-winger supporters of the current dispensation, he finds that they seem to have
[Amit Varma]: almost this warped sense of time, where what happened yesterday is as relevant as what
[Amit Varma]: happened in the 1500s.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, the fact that Babur breaking a mosque can have ripples of repercussion
[Amit Varma]: through the centuries is both perverse and almost kind of stunning.
[Amit Varma]: So it's sort of, you know, whenever I end my show, and I'm talking to my guest about
[Amit Varma]: a particular subject, I'll ask this almost cliched question by now when people on Twitter
[Amit Varma]: make fun of me for asking it every time, which is what gives you hope and what gives you
[Amit Varma]: despair about XYZ and so on.
[Amit Varma]: Given the sort of divergent trends of history, on the one hand, it's a political tool and
[Amit Varma]: that, you know, perhaps a study of history in many cases is affected by the ideological
[Amit Varma]: lens that you bring to bear upon it.
[Amit Varma]: And that's one side of the situation.
[Amit Varma]: But the other side is that more and more people have access to historical documents and are
[Amit Varma]: showing greater interest in books of history, you know, such as by people like you, what
[Amit Varma]: gives you hope and what gives you despair about the study of history over the next few
[Amit Varma]: years and decades in India?
[Guest]: So I think exactly these two things that you said, I think, you know, the despair certainly
[Guest]: comes from the fact that, you know, like you're saying, Sadanand, who may say that, you know,
[Guest]: it's almost like we are fighting our elections in the 16th century or 17th century.
[Guest]: You know, those are the burning topics of the day.
[Guest]: You know, we must have the Mughals be accountable now, demand answers from them.
[Guest]: And it's a very, it's a clever thing, because, you know, when if you're demanding answers
[Guest]: from the Mughals, then you don't have time to demand answers from your current rulers
[Guest]: or current government, you know, all the attention is just over there.
[Guest]: And even that, you know, today we are talking and I don't know the whole news yet, but that,
[Guest]: you know, Section 144 should have been imposed on many parts, many cities in the country.
[Amit Varma]: We are recording this on the day of the Ayodhya judgment, by the way.
[Guest]: So, yeah.
[Guest]: And, you know, imagine that too, that these are the kind of debates that we are embroiled
[Guest]: in.
[Guest]: And yet at the same time, this very fact that, you know, I find, you know, that one of the
[Guest]: one of the nicest and most heartening things about writing this book was that whenever
[Guest]: I've spoken, not just, you know, spoken outside or met people or people who've read it, there's
[Guest]: been such a huge amount of interest and curiosity that that obviously exists.
[Guest]: And people, perhaps as a result of this, perhaps because of this kind of, you know, these visceral
[Guest]: emotional reactions that are sort of taking over our public discourse, perhaps because
[Guest]: of this, people now want to know what really happened.
[Guest]: And secondly, you know, people that you meet every day are very happy to enjoy history.
[Guest]: You know, I mean, I think that's the all these complications and these nuances and all these
[Guest]: wheels within wheels and stories within stories and all this sort of soap operas of it is
[Guest]: what makes it so interesting and thrilling and absorbing, you know, because these are
[Guest]: stories and people want to hear those stories and there's nothing about the complication
[Guest]: that puts them off.
[Guest]: In fact, that's what attracts people.
[Guest]: So and I think the fact that, you know, more and more people are writing this kind of book
[Guest]: is obviously an answer to sort of a growing demand and that that is definitely a good,
[Guest]: good, I think, nice, hopeful sign that people are not just willing, but want to sort of
[Guest]: take a deep dive into into the past and just swim around, you know, looking at the fish
[Guest]: and the corals, not judging all of it or getting hyper excited about all of it, but just enjoying
[Amit Varma]: the view.
[Amit Varma]: No, I couldn't agree with you more.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, I feel extremely hopeful about the fact that, I mean, I just think the more
[Amit Varma]: people dive into these stories, as you put about and swim about in these strange waters,
[Amit Varma]: that they will begin to get rid of the otherness of others.
[Amit Varma]: And hopefully through, you know, books like you and your writing.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you so much for coming on the show.
[Guest]: Thank you very much.
[Guest]: It was lovely to be here.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoyed listening to this episode, hop on over to your nearest bookstore online
[Amit Varma]: or offline and pick up Jahangir, an intimate portrait of a great Mughal by Parvati Sharma.
[Amit Varma]: I promise you'll finish it in one sitting.
[Amit Varma]: That's exactly what I did.
[Amit Varma]: Parvati very smartly because she's written so many books is not on social media, but
[Amit Varma]: I am you can follow me on Twitter at Amit Verma, A M I T V A R M A. You can browse past
[Amit Varma]: episodes of the scene in the unseen on scene unseen Radha Iyer and IVM podcast.com and
[Amit Varma]: Think Pragati.com.
[Amit Varma]: The scene in the unseen is supported by the Takshashila institution.
[Amit Varma]: Their postgraduate courses start in January.
[Amit Varma]: Check them out at Takshashila.org.in.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you for listening and don't behead anyone today.
[Unknown]: Poor Abu Fazal.
[Unknown]: The modern world is obsessed with food and agriculture.
[Unknown]: Everywhere you look, new and exciting technologies are bringing food innovation to your street
[Unknown]: market, your grocery store, your doorstep and your plate.
[Unknown]: From our quest for the perfect food photos to our rediscovery of ancient grains.
[Unknown]: Quite simply, food has never been sexier.
[Unknown]: But guess what?
[Unknown]: The modern food system is broken.
[Unknown]: It's a major cause of climate change, antibiotic resistance and global poverty.
[Unknown]: So how did we get here?
[Unknown]: And where are we going?
[Unknown]: Most importantly, how are we going to feed 10 billion people globally by the year 2050
[Unknown]: through better, more sustainable means?
[Unknown]: I'm Varun Deshpande and I'm Ramya Rammoorthy and we work for the Good Food Institute, a
[Unknown]: global nonprofit accelerating the transformation to a more healthy, sustainable and just food
[Unknown]: system.
[Unknown]: The next food revolution is here.
[Unknown]: On feeding 10 billion, we're giving you the inside view.
[Unknown]: You can tune in to us every Tuesday on the IVM podcast app or ivmpodcast.com or wherever
[Unknown]: you get your podcasts from.
[Unknown]: Hi, I'm Satyajit.
[Unknown]: Hi, I'm Racheta.
[Unknown]: We are from the Open Library Project and we host a podcast called Paperback.
[Unknown]: Paperback is a podcast where we engage with stalwarts and experts from various industries,
[Unknown]: suggesting nonfiction titles that contributed to their journey in a big way.
[Unknown]: We've had guests like Anjali Raina, Dr. Marcus Rani, Dr. Swati Lodha, Ambiparameswaran, Apoorva
[Unknown]: Damani and many more on our show Paperback.
[Unknown]: Find new episodes every Wednesday on IVM podcast app, website or wherever you listen
[Unknown]: to podcasts.